## Standard Deviations_ Flawed Assumptions, Tortured Data, and Other Ways to Lie wi - 0001 - Chapter 1

This is Audible. Music Gilden Media presents Your Coach in a Box Affordable Life-Changing Audio Programs. Standard Deviations Flood Assumptions, Tortured Data, and other ways to lie with statistics. By Gary Smith Narrated by Timothy Andres Pobon. Introduction We live in the age of big data. The potent combination of fast computers and worldwide connectivity is continually praised, even worshipped. Over and over we are told that government, business, finance, medicine, law, and our daily lives are being revolutionized by a newfound ability to sift through reams of data. And we can make wise decisions because powerful computers have looked at the data and seen the light. Maybe? Or maybe not? Sometimes these omnipresent data and magnificent computers lead to some pretty outlandish discoveries. In case in point, serious people have seriously claimed that messy rooms make people racist. Unborn chicken embryos can influence computer random event generators. When the ratio of government debt to GDP goes above 90%, nations nearly always slip into recession. As much as 50% of the drop in the crime rate in the United States over the past 20 years is because of legalized abortion. Drinking two cups of coffee a day substantially increases the risk of pancreatic cancer. The most successful companies tend to become less successful, while the least successful companies tend to become more successful, so that soon all will become mediocre. Athletes who appear on the cover of sports illustrated or madden NFL are jinxed in that they are likely to be less successful or injured. Living near power lines causes cancer in children. Humans have the power to postpone death until after important ceremonial occasions. Asian Americans are more susceptible to heart attacks on the fourth day of the month. People live three to five years longer if they have positive initials like ACE. Baseball players whose first names began with the letter D, die on average, two years younger than players whose first names began with the letters E through Z. The terminally ill can be cured by positive mental energy sent from thousands of miles away. In an NFC team wins the Super Bowl, the stock market almost always goes up. You can beat the stock market by buying the Dow Jones stock with the highest dividend yield and the second lowest price per share. These claims and hundreds more like them appear in newspapers and magazines every day even though they are surely false. In today's information age, our beliefs and actions are guided by torrents of meaningless data. It's not hard to see why we repeatedly draw false inferences and make bad decisions. Even if we are reasonably well informed, we're not always alert to the ways in which data are biased or irrelevant or to the ways in which scientific research is flawed or misleading. We tend to assume that computers are infallible, that no matter what kind of garbage we put in, computers will spit out gospel. It happens not just a layman in their daily lives, but in serious research by diligent professionals. We see it in the popular press, on television, on the internet, in political campaigns, in academic journals, in business meetings, in courtrooms, and of course in government hearings. Decades ago, when data were scarce and computers nonexistent, researchers worked hard to gather good data and thought carefully before spending hours, even days on painstaking calculations. Now with data so plentiful, researchers often spend too little time distinguishing between good data and rubbish, between sound analysis and junk science, and worst of all, we are too quick to assume that churning through mountains of data can't ever go wrong. We rush to make decisions based on the ballad ash these machines dish out, to increase taxes in the midst of a recession, to trust our life savings to financial quants, who impress us because we don't understand them. To base business decisions on the latest management fat, to endanger our health with medical quackery, but worst of all, to give up coffee. Ronald Kos cynically observed that if you torture the data long enough, it will confess. Standard deviations is an exploration of dozens of examples of torturous assertions that with even a moment's reflection don't pass the smell test. Sometimes the unscrupulous deliberately try to mislead us, other times the well-intentioned are blissfully unaware of the mischief they are committing. My intention in writing the book that inspired this audiobook is to help protect us from errors, both external and self-inflicted. You will learn simple guidelines for recognizing bull when you see it, or say it. Not only to others use data to fool us, we often fool ourselves.

---

## Standard Deviations_ Flawed Assumptions, Tortured Data, and Other Ways to Lie wi - 0002 - Chapter 2

CHAPTER 1. Patterns Patterns Youth soccer is a very big deal where I live in Southern California. It's a fun, inexpensive sport that can be played by boys and girls of all sizes and shapes. I initially didn't know anything about soccer. All I knew was that every weekend the city parks and school grounds were filled with kids in brightly colored uniforms chasing soccer balls while their parents cheered. And my son was old enough? We were in. By the time the 2010 World Cup came around, my son was playing on one of the top soccer teams in Southern California. I was the manager and a fanatic about soccer, so naturally he and I watched every World Cup match we could. The opponents in the 2010 Championship game were Netherlands and Spain. Two extraordinarily talented teams from under-achieving nations that often disappointed their supporters. Which country would finally win the World Cup? I loved the Dutch who had won all six of their World Cup games scoring twelve goals while allowing only five and had knocked out the mighty Brazil and Uruguay. But then I heard about Paul the Octopus who had correctly predicted the winners of seven World Cup games by choosing food from plastic boxes with the nation's flags on them. Paul the Oracle had picked Spain and the world now seemed certain of a Spanish victory. What the heck was going on? How could a slimy, pea-brained invertebrate know more about soccer than I did? I laughed and waited for Paul the omniscient to get his comeuppance, except he didn't. The Dutch did not play with their usual creativity and flair. In a brutal, cynical match with fourteen yellow cards, nine given to the dirty Dutchman, Spain scored the winning goal with four minutes left in the game. How could an octopus living in a tank have predicted any of this? Had Paul ever seen a soccer game? Did Paul even have a brain? It turns out that octopuses are among the most intelligent invertebrates, but that isn't saying much, sort of like being the world's tallest major. Still, Paul made eight World Cup predictions and got every single one right. Not only that, Paul made six predictions during the 2008 European football championships and got four right. Overall, that's twelve out of fourteen correct, which in the eyes of many would be considered statistical proof of Paul's psychic abilities. But were there really enough data? If a fair coin is flipped fourteen times, the chances of twelve or more heads are less than one percent. In the same way, if Paul were just a hapless guesser with a fifty percent chance of making a correct prediction, the probability that he would make so many correct predictions is less than one percent, a probability so low that it is considered statistically significant. The chances of Paul being correct so many times are so small that, logically, we can rule out luck as an explanation. With his consistency, Paul had demonstrated that he was not merely a lucky guesser, he was truly Paul the psychic octopus. And yet something didn't seem quite right. Is it really possible for an octopus to predict the future? Paul's performance raises several issues that are endemic in statistical studies. Paul was not a psychic, surprise, surprise, but he is a warning of things to watch out for the next time you hear some fanciful claim. Confounding effects First let's look at how Paul made his predictions. At feeding time, he was shown two clear plastic boxes with the national flags of the opposing teams glued to the front of the boxes. The boxes contained identical yummy treats such as a muscle or an oyster, whichever box Paul opened first was the predicted winner. Octopus's don't know much about soccer, but they do have excellent eyesight and good memories. One time an octopus at the New England Aquarium decided he didn't like a volunteer and shot saltwater at her whenever he saw her. He left the aquarium to go to college, but when she returned months later, the octopus remembered her and immediately drenched her with saltwater again. In an experiment at a Seattle aquarium, one volunteer fed the octopus's while another wearing identical clothes irritated the octopus's with a stick. After a week of this, most of the octopus's could tell who was who. When they saw the good person, they moved closer. When they saw the bad person, they moved away, and sometimes shot water at him for good measure. Paul the psychic octopus happened to be living in an aquarium in Germany and, except for the Spain Netherlands World Cup Final, Paul only predicted games involving Germany. In 11 of the 13 games involving Germany, Paul picked Germany and Germany won 9 of these 11 games. Was Paul picking Germany because he had analyzed their opponents carefully or because he had an affinity for the German flag? Paul was almost certainly colorblind, but experiments have shown that octopus's recognized brightness and are attracted to horizontal shapes. Germany's flag has three vivid horizontal stripes as to the flags of Serbia and Spain, the only other countries Paul selected. Indeed, the Spanish and German flags are pretty similar, which may explain why Paul picked Spain over Germany in one of the two matches they played and picked Spain over the Netherlands in the World Cup Final. The only game in which Paul did not choose the German or Spanish flag was a match between Serbia and Germany. The flag was apparently a confounding factor in that Paul wasn't picking the best soccer team. He was choosing his favorite flag. Paul the omniscient was just a pea-brained octopus after all. Selective reporting and misreporting. Another explanation for Paul's success is that too many people with too much time on their hands try stupid pet tricks using animals to predict sports, lottery and stock market winners. Some will inevitably succeed just like among thousands of people flipping coins, some people will inevitably flip heads ten times in a row. Who do you think gets reported? The octopus who picked winners or the ostrich who didn't? Several years ago a sports columnist for the Dallas Morning News had a particularly bad week picking the winners of National Football League NFL football games. He got one right and twelve wrong with one tie. He wrote that, theoretically, a baboon at the Dallas Zoo can look at a schedule of 14 NFL games, point to one team for each game and come out with at least seven winners. The next week, Candid the Great, a gorilla at the Dallas Zoo, made his predictions by selecting pieces of paper from his trainer. Candid got nine right and four wrong, better than all six Morning News sports riders. The media descended on the story like hungry wolves, but would Candid's performance have been reported if he had gotten, say, six right and seven wrong? Not to be outdone, officials at the Minnesota Zoo and Apple Valley Minnesota reported that a dolphin named Mindy successfully predicted the outcomes of NFL games by choosing among pieces of Plexiglass, each bearing a different team's name. The opponent's Plexiglass sheets were dropped into Mindy's pool, and the one she brought back to her handler was considered to be her prediction. The handlers reported that Mindy had gotten 32 of 53 games correct. If so, that's 60 percent enough to make a profit betting on football games. How many other birds, bees, and beasts tried and failed to predict NFL games and went unreported because they failed? We don't know, and that's precisely the point. If hundreds of pets are forced to make pointless predictions, we will be misled by the successful ones that get reported because we don't take into account the hundreds of unsuccessful pets that were not reported. This doesn't just happen in football games. A Minneapolis stockbroker once posted that he selected stocks by spreading the Wall Street journal on the floor and buying the stock touched by the first nail on the right paw of his golden retriever. The fact that he thought this would attract investors says something about him, and perhaps his customers. Another factor is that people seeking 15 minutes of fame are tempted to fudge the data to attract attention. Was there an impartial observer monitoring the Minneapolis stockbroker and his dog each morning? Back when Bridge was the most popular card game in America, a mathematically inclined bridge player estimated that far too many people were reporting to their local paper that they had been dealt a hand with 13 cards at the same suit. Given the chances of being dealt such a hand, there were not nearly enough games being played to yield so many wacky hands. Tullingly, this suit reported was usually spades. People were evidently embellishing their experiences in order to get their names in the paper. After Paul the octopus received worldwide attention, a previously obscure Singapore fortune teller reported that his assistant, Mani the Parakeed, had correctly predicted all four winners of the World Cup quarterfinal matches. Mani was given worldwide publicity, and then predicted that Uruguay would beat Netherlands and that Spain would beat Germany in the semi-finals with Spain defeating Uruguay in the championship game. After Netherlands defeated Uruguay, Mani changed his final's prediction, choosing Netherlands, which turned out to be incorrect. Nonetheless, the number of customers visiting this fortune teller's shop increased from 10 a day to 10 an hour, which makes you wonder whether the owner's motives were purely sporting and whether his initial reports of Mani's quarterfinal predictions were accurate. Why did Paul and Mani become celebrities who were taken seriously by soccer fans, celebrating and cursing their predictions? Why didn't they stay unnoticed in the obscurity they deserved? It's not them, it's us. Hard wire to be deceived. More than a century ago Sherlock Holmes pleaded to his long-suffering friend Watson, data, data, data, I can't make breaks without clay. Clay Holmes' wish has been granted in spades. Powerful computers sift through data, data, and more data. The problem is not that we don't have enough data, but that we are misled by what we have in front of us. It is not entirely our fault. You can blame it on our ancestors. The evolution of certain traits is relatively simple. Living things with inheritable traits that help them survive and reproduce are more likely to pass these traits on to future generations than are otherwise similar beings that do not have these traits. Continued generation after generation, these valuable inherited traits become dominant. The well-known history of the peppered moth is a simple, straightforward example. These moths are generally light-colored and spend most of their days on trees where they are camouflaged from the birds that prey on them. The first dark-colored peppered moths were reported in England in 1848 and by 1895, 98% of the peppered moths and Manchester were dark-colored. In the 1950s, the pendulum started swinging back. Dark-colored moths are now so rare that they may soon be extinct. The evolutionary explanation is that the rise of dark-colored moths coincided with the pollution caused by the industrial revolution. The blackening of trees from soot and smog gave dark-colored moths the advantage of being better camouflaged and less likely to be noticed by predators. As dark-colored moths were more likely to survive long enough to reproduce, they came to dominate the gene pool. England's clean air laws reversed the situation as light-colored moths are camouflaged better on pollution-free trees. Their survival advantage now allows them to flourish. Other examples of natural selection are more subtle. For example, studies have consistently found that men and women are more attracted to people with symmetrical faces and bodies. This isn't just cultural, it is true across different societies, true of babies, and even found in other animals. In one experiment, researchers clipped the tail feathers of some male barn swallows to make them asymmetrical. Other males kept their symmetrical tail feathers. When female swallows were let loose in this mating pool, they favored the males with symmetrical feathers. This preference for symmetry is not just a superficial behavior. Symmetry evidently indicates an absence of genetic defects that might hamper a potential mate's strength, health, and fertility. Those who prefer symmetry eventually dominate the gene pool, because those who don't are less likely to have offspring that are strong, healthy, and fertile. Believe it or not, evolution is also the reason why many people took Paul and Manny seriously. Our ingrained preference for symmetry is an example of how recognizing patterns helped our human ancestors survive and reproduce in an unforgiving world. Our clouds often bring rain, a sound in the brush may be a predator. Hair quality is a sign of fertility. Those distant ancestors who recognized patterns that helped them find food and water, warned them of danger, and attracted them to fertile mates, passed this aptitude onto future generations. Those who were less adept at recognizing patterns that would help them survive and reproduce had less chance of passing on their genes. For countless generations of natural selection, we have become hardwired to look for patterns and to think of explanations for the patterns we find. Storm clouds bring rain, predators make noise, fertile adults have nice hair. Unfortunately, the pattern recognition recipes that were valuable for our long ago ancestors are ill-suited for our modern lives, where the data we encounter are complex and not easily interpreted. We are inherited desire to explain what we see fuels two kinds of cognitive errors. First, we are too easily seduced by patterns and by the theories that explain them. Second, we latch onto data that support our theories and discount contradicting evidence. We believe stories simply because they are consistent with the patterns we observe, and once we have a story, we are reluctant to let it go. When you keep rolling sevens at the craps table, you believe you are on a hot streak because you want to keep winning. When you keep throwing snake eyes, you believe you are due for a win because you want to start winning. We don't think hard enough about the fact that Dysonaut remember the past and do not care about the future. They are inanimate. The only meaning they carry is what we hope for humans ascribe to them. If the hot streak continues or the cold streak ends, we are even more convinced that our fanciful theory is correct. If it doesn't, we invent excuses so that we can cling to our nonsensical story. We see the same behavior when athletes wear unwashed, lucky socks, when investors buy hot socks or when people throw good money after bad, confident that things must take a turn for the better. We yearn to make an uncertain world more certain to gain control over things that we did not control to predict the unpredictable. If we did well wearing these socks, then it must be that these socks help us do well. If other people made money buying this stock, then we can make money buying this stock. If we have had bad luck, our luck has to change, right? Order is more comforting than chaos. These cognitive errors make us susceptible to all sorts of statistical deceptions. We are too quick to assume that meaningless patterns are meaningful when they are presented as evidence of the consequences of a government policy, the power of a marketing plan, the success of an investment strategy or the benefits of a food supplement. Our vulnerability comes from a deep desire to make sense of the world and it's notoriously hard to shake off. Publish or perish Even highly educated and presumably dispassionate scientists are susceptible to being seduced by patterns. In the cutthroat world of academic research, brilliant and competitive scientists perpetually seek fame and funding to sustain their careers. This necessary support in turn depends on the publication of interesting results in peer-reviewed journals. Publisher Parish is a brutal fact of university life. Sometimes the pressure is so intense that researchers will even lie and cheat to advance their careers. When publishable results to survive, frustrated that their results are not turning out the way they want and fearful that others will publish similar results first, researchers sometimes take the shortcut of manufacturing data. After all, if you are certain that your theory is true, what harm is there in making updated a proven? One serious example of this kind of deception is the vaccine scare created by the British doctor Andrew Wakefield. His 1998 co-authored paper in the prestigious British Medical Journal, The Lancet, claimed that 12 normal children had become autistic after being given the measles, mumps and rebella MMR vaccine. Even before the paper was published, Wakefield held a press conference announcing his findings and calling for the suspension of the MMR vaccine. Many parents saw the news reports and thought twice about what was previously a deri-gur procedure. The possibility of making their children autistic seemed more worrisome than the minute chances of contracting diseases that had been virtually eradicated from Britain. More than a million parents refused to allow their children to be given the MMR vaccine. I live in the United States, but my wife and I read the news stories and we worried too. We had sons born in 1998, 2000 and 2003, and a daughter born in 2006, so we had to make a decision about their vaccinations. We did our homework and talked to doctors, all of whom were skeptical of Wakefield study. They pointed out that there is no evidence that autism has become more commonplace, only that the definition of autism is broadened in recent years, and that doctors and parents have become more aware of its symptoms. On the other hand, measles, mumps, and rebella are highly contagious diseases that have been effectively eliminated in many countries precisely because of routine immunization programs. Having our children unvaccinated would not only put them but other children at risk as well. In addition, the fact that this study was so small, only 12 children, and the author seemed so eager for publicity were big red flags. In the end, we decided to give our children the MMR vaccine. The doctors we talked to weren't the only skeptics. Several attempts to replicate Wakefield's findings found no relationship at all between autism and the MMR vaccine. And even worse, a 2004 investigation by a London Sunday Times reporter named Brian Deere uncovered some suspicious irregularities in the study. It seemed that Wakefield's research had been funded by a group of lawyers envisioning lucrative personal injury lawsuits against doctors and pharmaceutical companies. Even more alarmingly, Wakefield himself was evidently planning to market an alternative vaccine that he could claim is safe. Were Wakefield's conclusions tainted by these conflicts of interest? Wakefield claimed no wrongdoing, but Deere kept digging. What he found was even more damning. The data in Wakefield's paper did not match the official National Health Service medical records of the nine children who Wakefield reported to have regressive autism, only one had actually been diagnosed as such, and three had no autism at all. People reported that the 12 children were previously normal before the MMR vaccine, but five of them had documented developmental problems. Most of Wakefield's co-authors quickly disassociated themselves from the paper. The Lancet retracted the article in 2010 with an editorial comment, it was utterly clear without any ambiguity at all that the statements in the paper were utterly false. End quote. The British Medical Journal called the Wakefield study an elaborate fraud, and the UK General Medical Council barred Wakefield from practicing medicine in the UK. Unfortunately, the damage was done. Hundreds of unvaccinated children have died from measles, mumps, and rubella to date, and thousands more are at risk. In 2011, Deere received a British press award, commending his investigation of Wakefield as a tremendous writing of a wrong. We can only hope that the debunking of Wakefield will receive as much press coverage as his false alarms, and that parents will once again allow their children to be vaccinated. Vaccines, by definition the injection of pathogens into the body, are a logical fear, particularly when they relate to our children's safety. But what about the illogical? Can manufactured data persuade us to believe the patently absurd? Deerex Staples, an extraordinarily productive and successful Dutch social psychologist, was known for being very thorough and conscientious in designing surveys, often with graduate students or colleagues. I'll be enough for a senior researcher, he administered the surveys himself, presumably to schools that he alone had access to. Another oddity was that Staples would often learn of a colleague's research interest, and claim that he had already collected the data the colleague needed. Staples supplied the data and returned for being listed as a co-author. Staples was the author or co-author on hundreds of papers and received a Career Trajectory Award from the Society of Experimental Social Psychology in 2009. He became dean of the Tilburg School of Social and Behavioral Sciences in 2010. Many of Staples' papers were provocative but plausible, others pushed the boundaries of plausibility. In one paper he claimed that messy rooms make people racist. In another he reported that eating meat, indeed simply thinking about eating meat, makes people selfish, no, I am not making this up. Some of Staples' graduate students were skeptical of how strongly the data supported his half-baked theories and frustrated by Staples' refusal to show them the actual survey data. They reported their suspicions to the Chair of the Psychology Department and Staples soon confessed that many of his survey results were either manipulated or completely fabricated. He explained that, I wanted too much too fast. Staples was suspended and then fired from Tilburg University in 2011. In 2013 Staples gave up his PhD and retracted more than 50 papers in which he had falsified data. He also agreed to do 120 hours of community service and forfeit benefits worth 18 months salary. In return, Dutch prosecutors agreed not to pursue criminal charges against him for the misuse of public research funds, reasoning that the government grants had been used mainly to pay the salaries of graduate students who did nothing wrong. Meanwhile the rest of us can feel a little less guilty about eating meat and having messy rooms. Another example of falsified data involved tests for extra-sensory perception ESP. Many ESP experiments used a pack of cards designed by Duke psychologist Carl Zener. The 25 card pack features five symbols, circle, cross, wavy lines, square, or star. After the cards are shuffled, the sender looks at the cards one by one and the receiver guesses the symbols. Some skeptics suggested that receivers could obtain high scores by peeking at the cards or by detecting subtle clues from the sender's behavior, such as a quick glance, a smile, or a raised eyebrow. Walter J. Levy, the director of the Institute for Parapsychology established by ESP pioneer J.B. Rine, tried to diffuse such criticism by conducting experiments involving computers and non-human subjects. In one experiment, eggs containing chicken embryos were placed in an incubator that was heated by a light turned on and off by a computer random event generator. The random event generator had a 50% chance of turning the light on, but Levy reported that the embryos were able to influence the computer in that the light was turned on more than half the time. Some of Levy's colleagues were skeptical of these telepathic chicks, I would hope so, and puzzled by Levy's fussing with the equipment during the experiments. They modified the computer to generate a secret record of the results and observed the experiment from a secret hiding place. Their fears were confirmed. The secret record showed the light going on 50% of the time, and they witnessed Levy tampering with the equipment to push the reported light frequency above 50%. When confronted, Levy confessed and resigned, later explaining that he was under tremendous pressure to publish. Reaching Statistical Significance The examples were most interested in though, do not involve fraudulent data. They involve practices more subtle and widespread. Many concerns statistical significance, an odd religion that researchers worship almost blindly. Suppose we want to test whether daily doses of aspirin reduce the risk of a heart attack. Ideally, we compare two random samples of healthy individuals. When sample takes aspirin daily, the second sample takes a placebo, an inert substance that looks, feels and tastes like aspirin. The test should be double blind so that the subjects and the doctors do not know who is in each group. Otherwise the patients might be more likely to report, and the doctors more likely to hear, the quote unquote, right results. When the study is finished, the statisticians move in. The statistical issue is the probability that by chance alone, the difference between the two groups would be as large as that actually observed. Most researchers consider a probability less than 0.05 to be statistically significant. Patterns in the data are considered statistically persuasive if they have less than a one and twenty chance of occurring by luck alone, while the octopus's record was statistically significant because he had less than a one percent chance of being that lucky. In the first five years of an aspirin study involving 22,000 male doctors, there were 18 fatal heart attacks in the placebo group compared to five in the aspirin group. The probability of this large of disparity by chance alone is less than 1 percent. What about non-fatal heart attacks? Here there were 171 in the placebo group and 99 in the aspirin group. The chances of this large of disparity by luck alone is about 1 in 100,000. These results were statistically significant, and the American Heart Association now recommends daily aspirin for those with a high risk of suffering a heart attack. On the other hand, not finding a statistically significant result is sometimes more interesting than finding one. In 1887, Albert Michelson and Edward Morley measured the speed of light both parallel and perpendicular to the Earth's motion, expecting to find a difference that would confirm a theory that was popular at the time, but instead they found no statistically significant difference at all. The research laid the groundwork for the development and the acceptance of Einstein's special theory of relativity. Their so-called failed study helped revolutionize physics. Closer to home, later in this audiobook we will discuss arthroscopic surgery, a routine procedure performed hundreds of thousands of times each year for knee osteoarthritis. Recent studies have found no statistically significant benefits, a conclusion that could save millions of dollars each year in unnecessary surgery, not to mention the inconvenience and risk of complications from the surgical procedure. Not finding statistical significance for this widespread procedure was undoubtedly more valuable than many studies that have found statistical significance for the treatment of uncommon ailments. Nonetheless, a study of psychology journals found that 97% of all published test results were statistically significant. Surely, 97% of all the tests that were conducted did not yield statistically significant results, but editors generally believe that tests are not worth reporting unless the results are statistically significant. The same is true outside academia. A business or government researcher trying to demonstrate the value of a certain strategy, plan or policy, feels compelled to present statistically significant empirical evidence. Everywhere researchers chase statistical significance, and it is by no means an elusive array. With fast computers and plentiful data, finding statistical significance is trivial. If you look hard enough, it can even be found in tables of random numbers. One way to find it is to test many theories, but only report the results that are statistically significant. Even if only worthless theories are considered, one out of every twenty tests of worthless theories will be statistically significant. With mountains of data, powerful computers, and incredible pressure to produce publishable results, untold numbers of worthless theories get tested. Hundreds of researchers test thousands of theories right up the statistically significant results, and discard the rest. The problem for society is that we only see the tip of this statistical iceberg, we see the statistically significant result, but not the tests that didn't work out. If we knew that behind the reported test were hundreds of unreported tests, and remember that on average one out of every twenty tests of worthless theories will be statistically significant, we would surely view what does get reported with more skepticism. Pharmaceutical companies, for example, test thousands of experimental drugs, and even in well-designed, unbiased studies, we can expect hundreds of worthless drugs to show statistically significant benefits, which can in turn generate immense profits. Drugmakers have a powerful incentive to test, test, and test some more. There is a much smaller incentive to retest and improve treatment to see whether the initial results were just a fluke, one of those one out of every twenty worthless treatments, that turn out to be statistically significant. When approved treatments do get retested, it is not at all surprising that the results are often disappointing. John Ionitis holds positions at the University of Ionina in Greece, the Tufts University School of Medicine in Massachusetts, and the Stanford University School of Medicine in California. Imagine the frequent flyer miles, imagine the lack of sleep. Ionitis has devoted his career to warning doctors and the public about naively accepting medical test results that have not been convincingly replicated. In one study, he looked at forty-five of the most widely respected medical studies during the year's 1990 through 2003 that claimed to have demonstrated effective treatments for various ailments. In only thirty-four cases were attempts made to replicate the original test results with larger samples. The initial results were confirmed in twenty of these thirty-four cases, fifty-nine percent. For seven treatments, the benefits were much smaller than initially estimated. For the other seven treatments, there were no benefits at all. Overall, only twenty of the forty-five studies had been replicated, and these were for the most highly respected studies. In the same year that Ionitis published these unsettling findings, he wrote another paper with the damning title, Why Most Published Research Findings Are False. Another way to secure statistical significance is to use the data to discover a theory. Statistical tests assume that the researcher starts with the theory, collects data to test the theory, and reports the results, whether statistically significant or not. Many people work in the other direction, scrutinizing the data until they find a pattern, and then making up the theory that fits the pattern. Ransacking data for patterns is fun and exciting, like playing Sudoku or solving a murder mystery. Examined the data from every angle, separate the data into categories based on gender, age, and race. This card data that muddles patterns, look for something, anything that is interesting. After a pattern is discovered, start thinking about reasons. As researchers sift through the data looking for patterns, they are explicitly or implicitly doing hundreds of tests. Imagine yourself in their shoes. First you look at the data as a whole, then you look at males and females separately, then you differentiate between children and adults, then between children, teenagers and adults, then between children, teenagers, adults, and seniors. Then you try different age cutoffs. You let the senior category be 65 plus, and when that doesn't work, you try 55 plus, or 60 plus, or 70 plus, or 75 plus. Eventually something clicks. Even if researchers don't do formal statistical tests with every permutation of the data, they are still doing casual tests by looking for arrangements of the data that appear to be statistically significant. If we knew that the researcher obtained the published results by looking at the data in a hundred different ways, we would surely view the results with suspicion. These practices, selective reporting and data pillaging, are known as data grubbing. The discovery of statistical significance by data grubbing shows little other than the researchers' endurance. We cannot tell whether a data grubbing marathon demonstrates the validity of a useful theory, or the perseverance of a determined researcher until independent tests confirm or refute the finding, but more often than not, the tests stop there. After all, you won't become a star by confirming other people's research, so why not spend your time discovering new theories? The data grub theory consequently sits out there, untested, and unchallenged. Many important scientific theories started out as efforts to explain unearthed patterns, for example during the 1800s most biologists believed that parental characteristics were averaged together to determine the characteristics of their offspring. For example, a child's height is an average of the parent's heights, modified perhaps by environmental influences. Gregor Mendel, an Augustinian monk, conducted meticulous studies of tens of thousands of pea plants over an eight-year period. He looked at several different traits and concluded that the blending theory didn't work. He cross-pollinated green-seeded plants with yellow-seeded plants, the offspring seeds were either green or yellow, not yellowish green. When he cross-pollinated smooth-seeded plants with wrinkly-seeded plants, the offspring seeds were either smooth or wrinkled, not something in between. To explain the results of his experiments, he proposed what are now known as Mendel's laws of inheritance, an elegant probabilistic model of how traits pass from one generation to the next and sometimes skip generations. He conceived the theory to fit his data and thereby laid the foundation for modern genetics. However, data-grubbing has also been the source of thousands of quack theories. How can we tell the difference between a good theory and quackery? There are two effective antidotes, common sense and fresh data. If it is a ridiculous theory, we shouldn't be persuaded by anything less than overwhelming evidence and even then be skeptical. Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence. Unfortunately, common sense is an uncommon commodity these days and many silly theories have been seriously promoted by honest researchers. Have you heard the one about a baseball player's life expectancy falling by five years once he is elected to the Hall of Fame? Or the Chinese people who die of heart disease because they were born in a fire year? You will later in this audiobook. The second antidote is fresh data. It is not sensible to test a theory with a very data that were ransacked to concoct the theory. If a theory was made up to fit the data, then of course the data support the theory. Theory should be tested with new data that have not been contaminated by data-grubbing. When data-grubbed theories are tested with fresh data, the results are usually disappointing, which is not at all surprising. It is surely misleading to use the data that inspired a theory to test the theory, and it is surely unsurprising that the theory does not fit new data nearly as well as it fit the original data. Case in point, I just clicked a quarter off my desk with the baby finger on my left hand and the quarter landed tails. After seeing the quarter land tails, my theory is that if I flick a quarter off my desk with the baby finger on my left hand, it will always land tails. After all, my data supported. This theory is obviously stupid and useless, but no more so than some theories we will examine in detail in later chapters that are harder to see through even though they are derived in essentially the same way as my quarter-flicing theory. If children who died of cancer lived near power lines, then electromagnetic fields, EMFs from power lines must cause cancer, right? If a theory sort of makes sense and you don't know that the theory came after looking at the data, after the quarter landed on the floor, it is tempting to believe that a theory that fits the data must be correct, after all, the data confirmed the theory. This is one of those temptations that should be resisted. Fortunately, we can resist. We can overcome the predilections we inherited from our distant ancestors as they struggle to survive and reproduce. We don't have to be duped by data. Don't be fooled. We are genetically predisposed to look for patterns and to believe that the patterns we observe are meaningful. If a baseball player plays a good game after wearing new socks, he shouldn't change socks. If the stock market does well after NFC teams win the Super Bowl, watch the game before investing. If a basketball player makes four shots in a row, he is hot and is very likely to make the next shot. If a heart attack victim recovers after being sent healing thoughts from a thousand miles away, distant healing works. If a customer satisfaction survey finds that people living in homes with three bathrooms are more enthusiastic than are people living in homes with two bathrooms, that is the target market. If a country has a recession when federal debt was high, then government debt causes recessions. Throughout this audiobook, we will debunk dozens of such examples. Don't be fooled into thinking that a pattern is proof. We need a logical persuasive explanation, and we need to test the explanation with fresh

---

## Standard Deviations_ Flawed Assumptions, Tortured Data, and Other Ways to Lie wi - 0003 - Chapter 3

Chapter 2. Garbage Inn. Gospel Out. Charles Babbage was born in London on December 26, 1791, a time of great change in technology and social mobility. He was keenly interested in mathematics, but frustrated by mistakes he found in mathematical and astronomical tables that were based on human calculations. The mistakes were not only intellectually frustrating, they had serious consequences, including causing captains to sail their ships into rocks and other hazards. It was considered unpatriotic for an honorable Englishman to pay attention to French mathematicians, nonetheless, Babbage did. He discovered that the French government had produced several mathematical tables using an automated human system. Senior mathematicians determined the formulas needed to fill in a table, and junior mathematicians resposified these formulas so that the calculations could be done by simple addition and subtraction. For example, to calculate four times eight, we can add eight plus eight plus eight equals thirty-two. The menial work of adding and subtracting was done by specialists who were called computers. Babbage realized that in theory, machines could be designed that would add and subtract with one hundred percent accuracy, thereby eliminating human error. Babbage also knew about the calculating machines designed by two Germans, Wilhelm Schickert and Gottfried Wilhelm Liebnitz, and the great French mathematician Blaise Pascal. As a teenager Pascal had invented a mechanical calculator called the Arrit-Matique or Pascaline to help his father a French tax collector. The Arrit-Matique was a box with visible dials connected to wheels hidden inside the box. Each dial had ten digits labeled zero through nine. When the dials for the ones column moved from nine to zero, the dial for the tens column moved up one notch, when the dial for the tens column moved from nine to zero, the dial from the one hundred's column moved up one notch, and so on. The Arrit-Matique could do addition and subtraction, but the dials had to be turned by hand. Babbage put together these two ideas, converting complex formulas into simple calculations and automating the simple calculations, and designed a mechanical computer that could do the calculations perfectly every time. Called the difference engine, Babbage's first design was a steam-powered behemoth made of brass and iron that stood eight feet tall, weighed fifteen tons, and contained twenty-five thousand distinct parts. The difference engine could make calculations up to twenty decimals long, and could print formatted tables of the results. After a decade tinkering with the design, Babbage began working on plans for a more powerful calculator he called the analytical engine. This design had more than fifty thousand components used perforated cards to input instructions and data, and could store up to one thousand fifty digit numbers. The analytical engine had a cylindrical mill, fifteen feet tall and six feet in diameter that executed instructions sent from a twenty-five foot long store. The store was like a modern computer's memory with the mill the CPU. Babbage's core principles were sound and similar to how modern computers work. However given the technology of his time, his proposed machines were mechanical beasts, and he was continually frustrated by limited financial resources and an inability to secure the precision components he needed. Nonetheless his vision was so grand and his attention to detail so astonishing that his brain, the brain that invented the computer, is preserved to this day and displayed at the English Royal College of Surgeons. On the 200th anniversary of his birth in 1991 the London Science Museum made several of Babbage's computers from his original plans, including the second difference engine, which worked as accurately as he intended and made calculations to thirty-one digits. In 2011 a private nonprofit project called Plan 28 was launched to build Babbage's analytical engine so that we can be inspired by Babbage's vision, which was literally a hundred years ahead of its time. The goal is to have it built by 2021 the 150th anniversary of Babbage's death. Being a century ahead of his time it is not surprising that many people were mystified by Babbage's vision, and his autobiography he recounted that, on two occasions I have been asked by members of Parliament, pray Mr. Babbage, if you put into the machine wrong figures will the right answers come out? I am not able rightly to apprehend the kind of confusion of ideas that could provoke such a question. Even today when computers are commonplace many well-meaning people still cling to the misperception that because computers do not make arithmetic mistakes they are infallible. A 2014 article in Harvard's Alumni Magazine claimed that, whenever sufficient information can be quantified, modern statistical methods will outperform an individual or small group of people every time. That statement is either so hopelessly circular as to be meaningless or it is flat out wrong. The reality is that if we ask a computer to do something stupid it will faithfully do it. Garbage in Garbage out is a snappy reminder of the fact that no matter how powerful the computer the value of the output depends on the quality of the input. A variation on this saying is garbage in gospel out referring to the tendency of people to put excessive faith in computer generated output without thinking carefully about the input. If the computer's calculations are based on bad data the output is not gospel but garbage. There are unfortunately far too many examples of people worshipping calculations based on misleading data. Here are a few. Go to the best school. David Leighenhart, Washington Bureau Chief of the New York Times, has won several awards, including the Pult Surprise for his writing on economic topics. In 2009 he wrote a Times column about crossing the finish line, a book by William Bowen and Michael McPherson, two former college presidents, and a doctoral candidate who presumably did the heavy lifting by analyzing data for 200,000 students at 68 colleges. The book's core argument is that the United States does a great job persuading students to go to college, but allows you to get students to graduate from college. Half of those who go to college don't graduate. The first culprit they identify is under matching. Students who go to colleges with high graduation rates choose instead to go to colleges with low graduation rates. Professor Bowen told Leighenhart, I was really astonished by the degree to which presumptively well-qualified students from poor families under matched. Overall about half the low income college bound students with GPAs above 3.5 and SAT scores above 1200 could have gone to better colleges but chose not to. For example, 90% of the students at the University of Michigan graduate within six years compared to only 40% at Eastern Michigan, yet many students with good enough grades to go to Michigan choose Eastern Michigan. An economic solution to under matching would be to make Eastern Michigan more expensive or Michigan less expensive so that students would have an incentive to choose the school with the higher graduation rate. If only it were that easy. These data are garbage and the conclusion is not gospel. Getting these so-called under matched students to go to Michigan might actually lower their chances of graduating. The researchers assumed that the students were randomly assigned to Michigan or Eastern Michigan much like the doctors who were randomly given aspirin or a placebo. College decisions are not a science experiment. Self-selection bias occurs when people choose to be in the data, for example, when people choose to go to college, marry, or have children. When this happens, comparisons to people who make different choices are treacherous. For example, we are often told that college graduates earn more than high school graduates suggesting that the observed difference in incomes measures the financial return from going to college. However, part of the reason college graduates earn more may be that they are brighter and more ambitious than those who choose not to go to college. People who make different choices may in fact be different. Similarly, the under matching argument is undermined by self-selection bias. Students not only choose to go to college, they choose which college to go to. Many students who choose Eastern Michigan over Michigan may do so because they believe they would have trouble graduating from Michigan. This may be the right choice. After all, they know themselves better than we do. Even though Eastern Michigan has a low overall graduation rate, perhaps every student who could have gone to Michigan but chooses Eastern Michigan instead does actually graduate. We cannot tell this from the data. Self-selection bias is pervasive in what we call observational data, where we collect data by observing what people do. Because these people chose to do what they are doing, their choices may reflect who they are. This self-selection bias could be avoided with a controlled experiment in which people are randomly assigned to groups and told what to do. Fortunately for all of us, researchers seldom have the power to make us do things we don't want to do simply because they need experimental data. For a valid under matching study, students who are admitted to both Michigan and Eastern Michigan could be randomly assigned to each university. Then the graduation rates of the two groups could be compared. Because unlikely as it seems, something similar was actually done in the 1960s in Ipsilanti Michigan, where black children from low socioeconomic households were selected or rejected for an experimental preschool program based on the outcome of a coin flip. This study found that those who attended the preschool program were more likely to complete high school, less likely to be arrested, and more likely to have jobs. It may seem heartless to those who lost the coin flip, but this experiment demonstrated the value of the preschool program. Oddly enough, Eastern Michigan University is located in Ipsilanti. And even outer coincidences that in 2012, Eastern Michigan heroineously sent emails to 7700 students, one third of the student body, telling them that they had flunked out. The school president apologized for this inexcusable mistake, which would have pushed the school's graduation rate even lower. A reader of Leon Hart's New York Times column posted a comment arguing that the quality of the education is more important than the graduation rate. Otherwise, we could increase the graduation rate to 100%, simply by passing out diplomas to every student, with no annoying requirements like papers, exams, or class attendance. Leon Hart's response? Well, college graduates earn 54% more on average than college dropouts, so the degree certainty seems to have economic meaning. Self-selection bias again. Surely students who choose to go to college and choose to work hard enough to graduate from college are systematically different from college dropouts. The more voters, the better? Only about half of all eligible Americans vote in presidential elections. An interesting proposal to boost this percentage is to shame people who don't vote by posting their names in local newspapers or on the internet. A more radical solution is suggested by this argument that appeared in the New York Times in 2014. Punishment and surveillance by itself causes people to withdraw from political participation, acts of engagement like voting or political activism. In a large survey of mostly marginal men in American cities, the probability of voting declined by 8% for those who had been stopped and questioned by the police, by 16% for those who had experienced arrest, by 18% for those with a conviction, by 22% for those serving time in jail or prison. The apparent implication is that voting would increase greatly if there were fewer arrests and convictions. Before firing the police, consider that these are observational data. Perhaps the people being questioned, arrested and convicted, are not randomly selected from the population. Perhaps they have committed crimes, perhaps people who do not vote are also more likely to commit crimes and not because either causes the other. Fill her up. Drinking is a chronic problem at many colleges and very often a contributing factor to the dropout rate. Even when alcohol is not permitted on campus, there can be unfortunate incidents involving drunken students arrested in the surrounding neighborhoods. Students are upset about being arrested. Professors are upset that students are not studying. Parents are upset that the college is not monitoring and protecting their sons and daughters. The principle of in-local parentis in the place of a parent means that a college has a legal authority and responsibility to protect students even from their own poor decisions. The application of this principle has waxed and waned, but many colleges have good reason for concern. Students and parents have sued schools for being in essence bad parents. Arrests and deaths also have a chilling effect on admissions applications which are the lifeblood of a college. In 1984, E. Scott Geller, a psychology professor at Virginia Tech, presented a research paper at the annual convention of the American Psychological Association, reporting what he saw at three bars near the Virginia Tech campus, more fun than a science lab. He found that on average, drinkers who ordered beer by the pitcher consumed more than twice as much beer than did drinkers who ordered beer by the glass or bottle. His conclusion, reported nationwide, was that if we banned pictures of beer, we would have a significant impact on drinking. Geller has published more than 350 research articles, and among his many awards are the University Alumni Award for Excellence in Research and the Alumni Outreach Award from Virginia Tech for his exemplary real-world applications of behavioral science. But this was not one of his better studies. Common sense tells us that there is self-selection bias here, and that people who order pictures of beer are surely planning to drink a lot and generally fulfill their objective. There may be some psychological pressure to finish what has been paid for, but surely big drinkers will still be big drinkers even if they are forced to do so by the glass or the bottle. Geller has done many studies of college drinking during his long and productive career, and at the 2011 American Psychological Association Convention, 27 years after his bar study, he admitted the obvious. Many college students quote, intent to get intoxicated. We have shown in several studies that their intentions influence their behavior. If they intend to get drunk, it's difficult to stop that. Put down the remote. So many television channels, so little worth watching. Scripted reality shows, talent contests with untalented contestants. Doctor somebody telling somebody who may be the actors that they are okay. Judge somebody telling people who may be the actors that they are jerks. Comedy is with incessently annoying laugh tracks. Is it less painful if you watch television with the sound turned off? In word our mural, one of America's most respected radio and television journalists once said, television in the main is being used to distract, dilute, amuse and insulate us. And this was in 1958 during the so-called Golden Age of Television. Scientists have long known that watching television causes of viewers' brainwaves to switch from beta waves, alert, logical, to alpha waves, relaxed, unfocused. A great Gary Larson cartoon with the caption, in the days before television, shows a family sprawled on the floor and couch staring at a blank wall. Whether you're looking at a blank wall or a flickering light box, mindless staring, often accompanied by mindless eating and drinking, cannot be good for you. In 2011, a group of researchers reported that Australians who watch six hours of television a day die on average five years younger than people who don't watch any television. Doing the math, every hour of television past the age of 25 reduces life expectancy by twenty-two minutes. Not only do you waste an hour staring blankly, you lose an additional twenty-two minutes of your life. Taking into account people's lifetime television habits, they concluded that outlawing television would increase life expectancy by about two years. The now familiar problem is that these are observational data with self-selection bias. Perhaps the people who choose to watch TV all day are less active, more depressed, or in worse health than are people who have more interesting things to do and are healthy enough to do them. For a valid experiment, we could randomly select two groups of people, with one group prohibited from watching TV and the other group forced to watch TV six hours a day. I'd hate to lose that coin toss. Even my French. At breakfast before the disastrous Battle of Waterloo, Napoleon declared, Wellington is a bad general. The English are bad soldiers. We will settle this matter by lunchtime. For many this is just another example of the unjustified arrogance that makes the French so annoying. However, a study by American Express and the French tourist bureau found that most Americans who have visited France more than once for pleasure in the past two years did not think the French are unfriendly. How in the world did they come to this conclusion? Here is one way. Suppose that a researcher is hired to demonstrate that France is a fun travel destination. The researcher might conduct a simple survey. One. How many business trips have you taken to France in the past two years? Two. How many pleasure, non-business trips have you taken to France in the past two years? Three. Do you think the French are unfriendly? Suppose that most people who only take business trips to France think the French are unfriendly. This is why they never go ta France unless they have to. The researcher throws out these responses. Suppose that most people who have never been to France think the French are unfriendly. This is why they never go there. The researcher throws out these responses. Suppose that most people who have taken just one pleasure trip to France think the French are unfriendly. This is why they never went back. researcher throws out these responses, too. Suppose that most people who have taken more than one pleasure trip to France do not think the French are unfriendly. Finally, the answers the researcher wanted. The French tourism bureau can use these responses as the basis for their ad campaign. Most Americans who have visited France more than once for pleasure in the past two years do not think the French are unfriendly. This statement is literally true, yet deceptive. There is self-selection bias in that those who chose to go back to France almost certainly had a good time on their previous visits. The false implication is that most people who go to France once want to go back. This bias is inherent in all customer satisfaction surveys. An airline once advertised that 84% of the frequent business travelers from New York to Chicago preferred this airline to another airline. The puzzling thing about this ad was that only 8% of the people flying from New York to Chicago flew on this airline. If 84% of travelers preferred this airline, why were only 8% flying on it? The answer to this puzzle is that the 84% figure was based on a survey of passengers who were on one of this airline's flights from New York to Chicago. It is not surprising that travelers who choose this airline prefer it. It is surprising that 16% of the passengers prefer another airline. But we can hardly expect the airline to advertise that. 16% of the people flying on our planes wish they weren't. Only the weak survive. Self-selection bias isn't the only potential problem with observational data. In the 1970s, a class action lawsuit alleged that the Georgia Pacific saw a mill in Goss, Mississippi discriminated against blacks in their initial job assignments and promotions. 50% of the mill's labor force was black, but most black employees were hired in the lowest job classification, utility, and never promoted. At trial, the plant manager admitted that chief electrician was the only job at the mill that required any prior recipes. The recipes needed for all other positions could be learned on the job. The company's management also testified that hiring and promotion decisions were subjective and not based on any written procedures or specific criteria. The plant manager's explanation for why there were relatively few blacks in upper-level jobs included this gem. Black people are contented more so in a semi-recipe job than taking on the responsibility and extra hard work and long hours. The fifth circuit of the U.S. Court of Appeals was not persuaded by this insult. They cited the U.S. Supreme Court in Hazelwood School District versus United States. Their gross statistical disparities can be shown they alone may constitute prime a façier proof of a pattern or practice of discrimination and added that although proof of discriminatory motive is generally required in disparate treatment cases, the evidence of subjective, standard list decision making by company officials, which is a convenient mechanism for discrimination, satisfies this requirement. While the court's conclusion was no doubt correct, one part of the statistical evidence had a subtle flaw that was overlooked by everyone. The court was shown the 1976 wages of 11 employees who had been hired six years earlier to entry-level utility positions paying the same wages. In 1976, the five white employees earned an average of $3.88 per hour while the six black employees earned an average of only $2.99. This appeared to be clear evidence of salary discrimination, however it's not that simple. These data are backward looking in that the study took a group of employees and looked backward instead of forward. In a forward-looking study, the researcher selects a sample and monitors it as time passes. 1,000 people could be given medical checkups every year to see if there is a relationship between diet and heart disease, or 1,000 companies could be observed every year to see if there is a relationship between dividend policy and stop performance. In a backward-looking study in contrast, the researcher selects a sample and looks at its history, for example, the medical records of 1,000 elderly women were the past performance of 1,000 companies. backward-looking studies often have survivor bias in that when we choose a sample today and look backward, we only see the survivors. Medical histories of the elderly exclude those who did not live long enough to become elderly. Corporate financial histories exclude companies that went bankrupt. A comparison of the 1976 salaries of people hired in 1970 is backward-looking because it only includes those employees still with the company in 1976, thereby excluding those who were hired in 1970 and left the company voluntarily or involuntarily. Suppose the company hired ten whites and ten blacks in 1970 at exactly the same salary and that half of each group are productive and half unproductive. Suppose further that only this six-year period salaries increased by 30% for productive employees and 10% for unproductive employees independent of race. If all 20 employees were still with the company in 1976, average white and black salaries would be equal. If, however, unproductive white employees were fired, the average salary of the remaining whites would be higher than the average black salary. The same would happen if productive black employees left the company for better jobs elsewhere. We don't know if either of these things happened. The point is that a backward-looking study doesn't give a complete picture of what happened to everyone who was hired in 1970. Many observational studies are tainted by survivor bias. For example, an HMO survey found that more than 90% of its members were satisfied. There are two kinds of survivor bias here, both of which bias the reported satisfaction rate upward, people who left the plan because they were dissatisfied and people who died. Red Lion hotels once ran full-page advertisements claiming that, for every 50 business travelers who try red lion, a certain number don't come back, but 49 of 50 do. The basis for this claim was a survey of people staying at red lion, 98% of whom said they would usually stay in a red lion hotel when they travel. Obviously, people who stayed at red lion and didn't come back were excluded from this survey. Here's a tricky one. A study of 115 cats that have been brought to New York City's veterinary hospitals after falling from high-rise apartment buildings found that 5% of the cats that fell nine or more stories died while 10% of the cats that fell from lower heights died. The doctors speculated that this was because cats falling from higher heights are able to spread out their bodies and create a parachute effect. What's an alternative explanation? There is survivor bias here in that those cats that died from their falls were not brought to the hospital. In addition, many cat owners may have given up on cats that were still alive, but badly injured in high falls, while cat owners whose pets fell shorter distances tended to be more optimistic and more willing to pay for treatment at a hospital. Damaged Plains In World War II, the British Royal Air Force RAF planned to attach heavy plating to its airplanes to protect them from German fighter planes and land-based anti-aircraft gun. The protective plates weighed too much to cover an entire plane, so the RAF collected data on the location of bullet and shrapnel holes on planes that returned from bombing runs. Abraham Vald, a Hungarian Jew who had fled to the United States, had the insight to recognize that these data suffered from survivor bias. Returning planes seldom had holes in the cockpit and fuel tanks because those planes that were hit there did not survive and returned to Britain. Returning planes were more likely to have holes in the wings because these holes did little damage. Wald's advice was exactly the opposite of the initial conclusion. Instead of reinforcing the locations with the most holes, they should reinforce the locations with no holes. It worked. Far fewer planes were shot down and far more returned safely, ready to continue the war effort. Wald's clear thinking helped win the war. Success secrets In writing his best-selling book Good to Great, Jim Collins and his research team spent five years looking at the 40-year history of 1,435 companies and identified 11 stocks that clobbered the average stock. Abbott Laboratories, Circuit City, Fannie Mae, Gillette, Kimberly Clark, Kroger, New Corps, Philip Morris, Hittney Bowles, Walgreens, and Wells Fargo. After scrutinizing these 11 great companies, Collins identified several common characteristics and attached catchy names to each, like level five leadership, leaders who are personally humble but professionally driven to make their company great. Collins described his work as a search for timeless universal answers that can be applied by any organization. His search yielded the treasure he sought. Most any organization can substantially improve its stature and performance, perhaps even become great if it conscientiously applies the framework of ideas we've uncovered. Readers who wanted to believe did believe. Good to Great sold more than four million copies and appeared on several lists of the best management books of all time. The problem, of course, is that this is a backward-looking study undermined by survivor bias. Here is how the study should have been done. Start with a list of companies that existed at the beginning of this 40-year period. It could be all the companies in the S&P 500 index, all the companies traded on the New York Stock Exchange, or some other list. The important point is that the list starts 40 years ago, then use plausible criteria to select 11 companies predicted to do better than the rest. These criteria must be applied in an objective way without peeking at how the companies did over the next 40 years. It is not fair or meaningful to predict which companies will do well after looking at which companies did well. Those are not predictions, just history. After the chosen 11 are identified, their subsequent performance can be compared to other companies over a 40-year period. If Collins had done this, no doubt some of the 11 companies would have disappointed. Some might have gone bankrupt, so with some of the companies he did not select. That is the nature of the beast, but it would have been a fair comparison. Collins didn't do this. He ensured that his 11 companies would not disappoint by choosing them at the end of the 40-year period based on their success. Collins wrote that he developed all of the concepts by making empirical deductions directly from the data. He thought he was boasting that his study was unbiased and professional. He didn't just make this stuff up, he went wherever the data took him. In reality, Collins was admitting that he had no clue why some companies do better than others, and he was revealing that he was blissfully unaware of the perils of deriving theories from data. To buttress the statistical legitimacy of his theory, Collins talked to two professors at the University of Colorado. One said that the probabilities that the concepts in your framework appear by random chance are essentially zero. The other professor was more specific. He asked, what is the probability of finding by chance a group of 11 companies, all of whose members display the primary traits you discovered while the direct comparisons do not possess those traits? He calculated this probability to be less than one in 17 million. Collins concluded that, there is virtually no chance that we simply found 11 random events that just happened to show the good to great pattern we were looking for. We can conclude with confidence that the traits we found are strongly associated with transformations from good to great. I don't know how this probability of one in 17 million was calculated. I calculated the professor and he couldn't remember, but I do know that it is incorrect. The professor's calculations assume that the five traits were specified before looking at the data. They were not, and thus the calculations are irrelevant. The correct probability is not one in 17 million, it is one. That's right, 100%. Suppose that I am dealt five playing cards, the three of clubs, eight of clubs, eight of diamonds, queen of hearts, and ace of spades. Isn't that amazing? The chances of being dealt these particular cards is about one in three million, and yet there it is. If I had correctly predicted these five cards before they were dealt, that would have been amazing. Not so in predicting the cards after they have been dealt. After I look at the cards, the probability of having these five cards is one, not one in three million. When we look back in time at any group of companies, the best or the worst, we can always find some common characteristics. Look, every one of those 11 companies selected by Collins has either an I or an R in its name, and several have both an I and an R. Is the key for going from good to great to make sure that your company's name has an I or R in it? Of course not. Finding common characteristics after the companies have been selected is not at all unexpected, and not at all interesting. The interesting question is whether these common characteristics are of any use in predicting which companies will succeed in the future. For these 11 companies, the answer is no. If any may stock went from above $80 a share in 2001 to less than $1 a share in 2008, a circuit city went bankrupt in 2009. The performance of the other nine stocks following the publication of good to great was distinctly mediocre. From the publication of the book through 2012, five stocks did better than the overall stock market, six did worse. Twenty years earlier, another best-selling business book did something very similar, and that exactly the same problems. The real lesson from this recurring cycle is that the authors who write these books and the millions of people who buy them do not realize that the books are fundamentally flawed. McKinsey, one of the world's top consulting firms, asked two obscure consultants, Tom Peters and Robert Waterman, to take a look at several successful companies. Peters and Waterman talked to other McKinsey consultants and came up with a list of 43 companies with good reputations and strong financials. They then talked to managers and read magazine stories looking for common themes. This rather casual study was the basis for their wildly influential and successful book, In Search of Excellence, which identified eight common factors that Peters and Waterman found in these 43 excellent companies, for example, a bias for action and being close to the consumer. This too was a backward-looking study. There's no way of knowing whether companies with a bias for action, whatever that means, were more successful than other companies, or whether companies that had been excellent in the past would be excellent in the future. Thirty-five of these 43 companies have publicly traded stock. Since the book was published, 15 have done better than the overall stock market. Twenty, worse. Collins, Peters and Waterman did not provide any evidence that the characteristics they described were responsible for these companies' past success. To do that, they would have had to provide a theoretical justification for these characteristics, select companies beforehand that didn't did not have these characteristics, and monitor their success according to some metric established beforehand. They did none of this. This problem plagues the entire genre of books on formulas, slash secrets, slash recipes for a successful business, a lasting marriage, living to be one hundred, and so on and so forth that are based on backward-looking studies of successful businesses, marriages, and lives. There is inherent survivor bias. If we think we know any secrets for success, a valid way to test our theory would be to identify businesses or people with these traits and see how they do over the next 10 or 20 or 50 years. Otherwise, we're just staring at the past instead of predicting the future. Don't Be Fould We observe people working, playing, and living, and we naturally draw conclusions from what we see. Our conclusions may be distorted by the fact that these people chose to do what they are doing. The traits we observe may not be due to the activity, but may instead reflect the people who chose to do the activity. If we are told that kids who play competitive sports are confident, we shouldn't assume that playing competitive sports builds confidence, it may be that confident kids like to play competitive sports. If we are told that people who work on Wall Street are aggressive, we shouldn't assume that Wall Street nurtures aggression, it may be that Wall Street attracts aggressive people. If a Puelled Surprise winning journalist and the winner of a University Award for Excellence in Research can be duped by self-selection bias, we all need to be wary. We naturally draw conclusions from what we see, workers' wages, damaged aircraft, successful companies. We should also think about what we do not see. The employees who left, the planes that did not return, the companies that failed. The unseen data may be just as important or even more important than the seen data. To avoid survivor bias, start in the past and look forward. Look at people who were hired 20 years ago, planes that were sent on bombing missions, companies that were in business 40 years ago, and see what happened next.

---

## Standard Deviations_ Flawed Assumptions, Tortured Data, and Other Ways to Lie wi - 0004 - Chapter 4

CHAPTER 3. Apples and Prunes I have a friend named Steve who dropped out of Caltech to join the Army Rangers, an elite group of US soldiers sent on high-risk, close combat missions. Part of the Ranger Creed is, my country expects me to move further faster and fight harder than any other soldier. Steve's unit specialized in airborne assault missions and his knees took a beating from hundreds of parachute jumps. One time, his team was ambushed and pinned down in some rice paddies in Vietnam. They couldn't lift themselves up to fight or run, so they stayed as low as possible while they waited for helicopters to come in and disperse the enemy. Luckily, a sniper nicknamed Wild Bill had stayed on high ground for just this situation. Bill was 300 yards from the rice paddies, but he routinely hits targets at three times that distance. Wild Bill picked off the enemy soldiers one by one as they peaked out of their hiding places. By the time the choppers arrived, all the enemy soldiers were either dead or at fled. Another time, Wild Bill shot an enemy general in his car from a hundred yards away. The bullet was so powerful that it pierced the cars, supposedly bulletproof windshield, passed through the driver and killed the general sitting in the back seat. Steve retired from the Rangers with a pair of bad knees and a collection of amazing doors. Back in the States, he lived a peaceful but active life, playing sports and teaching scuba diving until his osteoarthritis knees slowed him down. Osteoarthritis is a degenerative disease and Steve was frustrated by bleak predictions of a less active future. One doctor told him, you're too old to play sports, which is not what Steve wanted to hear. Steve is hardly alone. Our knee joints are susceptible to tears, strains, and bits of loose cartilage after decades of supporting our overweight bodies while we stand, walk, run, jump, and dance. The most common treatment used hundreds of thousands of times each year is arthroscopic surgery. Two small incisions are made, one for a small fiber optic camera and one for the miniature instruments used for the surgery. The surgeon removes the debris and then repairs clean smooths and trims what is left. $5,000 later the pain is gone. At least that's the theory. Steve had arthroscopic surgery and raved about the results. He told me over and over that I should have an operation to repair my own tender knees, but I was skeptical. For decades, arthroscopic surgery had not been compared to anything. The doctors did the surgery, the patients said they felt better, and what more do we need to know? Well, for one thing, were their knees really improved? Perhaps the patients said they felt better because they thought they were supposed to feel better. Never underestimate the power of suggestion. Where are you undergoing an unnecessary surgery? I looked into this further. The truly scientific way to tell if surgery makes a real difference is to do a controlled experiment in which randomly selected patients have arthroscopic surgery while others do not. A seemingly insurmountable difficulty is that the patients would know whether they had surgery, and this would influence their reports about how they felt. To get around this problem, a controlled experiment conducted in the 1990s using 180 military veterans, not including Steve, set up an elaborate ruse. For those in the comparison group, two superficial incisions were made, and the doctors acted out a charade that mimicked arthroscopic surgery. The patients did not know that they were part of an experiment. Nor did the doctors who independently assessed the veterans' conditions over the next two years. The study concluded that at no point did those patients who had real arthroscopic surgery feel less pain or function any better than the comparison group that had the phony surgery. Evidently, the reported pain relief was due entirely to the placebo effect that occurs when people who believe in the power of medicine and are hopeful of a medical cure respond positively to treatment, even if the treatment has no medical value. After this study was published in 2002 in the New England Journal of Medicine, another study published six years later in the same journal confirmed that patients with knee osteoarthritis who received arthroscopic knee surgery, medication, and physical therapy fared no better on measures of pain, stiffness, and physical functions than did a comparison group that only received medication and physical therapy. Many doctors now advise patients to forego the surgery. This was the advice I received from my doctor, a sports medicine specialist, and I trusted him. Something very similar happened with gastric freezing, a bizarre and now discredited remedy for stomach ulcers. Stomach ulcers can be an excruciatingly painful ailment and were once commonly treated by surgically cutting off the supply of acid to the stomach. A doctor thinking outside the box thought that maybe the pain could be reduced by using ice to numb the stomach in much the same way that ice is used to reduce the pain from a sprained ankle and other external injuries. However, swallowing dozens of ice cubes would not only be unpleasant but inefficient since there was no way of ensuring that the ice cubes made sustained contact with the ulcer. The proposed solution was to insert a balloon into the stomach of an ulcer sufferer and pump a supercooled fluid through this balloon. This would be certainly less expensive and less dangerous than surgery, though the effects would not be as long-lasting. Experiments done in the 1950s concluded that this wacky idea actually worked and that patients reported reduced acid secretions and stomach pains. After the results were published in the prestigious Journal of the American Medical Association, gastric freezing was used for several years to ease the suffering of ulcer patients. In the early orthoscopic surgery for knee problems there was no comparison group for gastric freezing and thus no way to know if it really worked. When asked about their stomach pains, the patients may have been inclined to give what they believed to be the right answer. Again, what was needed was a controlled experiment in which randomly selected patients had super cooled fluid pumped into them while another group received a body temperature fluid. Of course, none of the patients could be told which fluid they were receiving. In this experiment was eventually done, the results were surprising. While 34% of those receiving the gastric freezing treatment reported improvement, 38% of those receiving the body temperature fluid did too. The placebo effect again. Subsequent studies confirmed that gastric freezing had no real benefits and doctors have stopped stuffing icy balloons down people's roads. As in these examples, well-designed empirical studies usually involve comparisons, however, comparisons are not always fair and valid as illustrated by the next example. Sometimes it's like comparing apples to prunes. The murder capital of Massachusetts If the Dow Jones industrial average falls 100 points in a day, is that a lot or a little? You can put the change into perspective by calculating the percentage decline. If the Dow started the day at 1,000, a 100-point drop is a 10% decline, panic. If the Dow started the day at 10,000, a 100-point drop is a 1% decline, annoying. Percentage changes in stock prices are informative, however, some percentage changes are misleading, for example, when comparing the percentage change in something small to the percentage change in something big. Wellfleet is a small Massachusetts town known for its oysters, artists, and tranquility. There was considerable surprise when a Boston newspaper reported that Wellfleet had the highest murder rate in Massachusetts, with 40 murders per 100,000 residents that year, more than double the murder rate in Boston, which had only 17 murders per 100,000 residents. A puzzled reporter looked into this statistical murder mystery and found that no Wellfleet police officer, including one who had lived in Wellfleet for 50 years, could remember a murder ever occurring in Wellfleet. However, a man accused of murdering someone 20 miles away had turned himself in at the Wellfleet Police Station, and this Wellfleet arrest had been erroneously counted as a Wellfleet murder. Because Wellfleet had only 2,491 residents, this one misrecorded arrest translated into 40 murders per 100,000 residents, Boston in contrast had 98 murders, which is 17 murders per 100,000 residents. This murder mystery shows how a statistical fluke can make a big difference if the base is small. A misrecorded murder in Boston has little effect on its murder rate, a misrecorded murder in Wellfleet puts a small village known for its oysters and artists on par with Detroit. One way to deal with a small base is to use data for several years to get a bigger base. Wellfleet's average murder rate over the past 50 years is one with the misrecorded arrest and zero without it, either way confirming that it is indeed a peaceful town. So relax and pass the oysters. Please open a quarry in my backyard. Temecula is a southern California community, approximately equidistant from Los Angeles, San Diego and Orange County. Although it is in an inland valley, Temecula is only 12 miles from the Pacific Ocean and daily ocean breezes carry cool air through a gap in the mountains giving the Temecula Valley a moderate Mediterranean climate. Just with wonderful weather can do enthusiasm and a strongly pro-business attitude. Temecula's population grew from under 2000 in 1980 to over 100,000 in 2010 with a median family income over $80,000. The small town also boasts a 128 acre sports facility with 10 baseball fields, five with lights, two lighted football slash soccer fields, a swimming pool, a gymnasium and a community center. The sunny days and cool nights are ideal not only for attracting people but also for producing wine. There are now more than 30 wineries in the Temecula Valley along with hundreds of antique dealers, specialty shops and restaurants, nine golf courses and the largest casino in California. There is hot air ballooning, a car show, a jazz festival and a film festival. In less than 30 years this rather small town has evolved into a premier tourist destination with 70,000 people a month staying in Temecula hotels and one-sixth of Temecula's residents involved in the tourist industry. In 2005 one of the nation's largest mining and construction companies applied for a permit to build a quarry near Temecula, a mega quarry really that would be the equivalent of 17 football fields long and as deep as the Empire State Building is tall. Rocks would be dislodged from a mountain by daily blasts of 10,000 pounds of explosives and then crushed into gravel and sand called aggregate that is used for concrete, asphalt and other construction materials. In addition to the crushing equipment there would be two asphalt plants, a concrete plant and a rubber recycling plant. Mining and processing would go on 20 hours a day, six days a week, producing 5 million tons of aggregate a year. Loading and shipping would be 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with 1,600 trucks a day entering and leaving the site. The proposed quarry was in the mountain gap where ocean breezes carry cool air to the Temecula Valley. Residents were understandably alarmed about the effects of this mega quarry on the city's economy and property values. What would tourists and homeowners do if the sea breeze carried dust, noise, odors and other pollutants into their beautiful city? Not to worry, said the mining company. A prominent local economist hired by the company to prepare an economic analysis concluded that the quarry would bring in $172 million in annual benefits with no costs whatsoever for residents. The mining company was Santa Claus in disguise, bringing $100 million presents to those who still believe in Santa. If the company's claims were true, cities would be begging for quarries. Instead of offering tax benefits, low interest loans and infrastructure to attract professional sports teams, cities would offer these incentives to mining companies. Here's $100 million. Please start mining in our city. But they don't. Given the economist that the company hired admitted as much, writing that aggregate mining operations almost always meet with opposition. Why are people opposed to hundreds of millions of dollars in benefits with no strings attached? Are people simply naive? Or are the paid consultants estimates grossly misleading? What's your guess? Let's look at this consultant's estimates of the benefits and costs and see what we find. The calculations of the economic benefits were presented in several spreadsheets, filled with mind-numbing detail about such things as the price of rubble and the amount of flocculent needed to remove fine material from water. All this detail created an illusion of rigorous economic analysis, while disguising the fact that $150 million of the spreadsheets, $172 million bottom line, was not actually a local benefit but the company's annual profits. That's right. The economist counted $150 million of corporate profit as a benefit for local residents simply because the company was selling to Macchill his earth. Unless there was some vicarious pleasure from watching a corporation get rich, there was no local benefit whatsoever from such profits. The remaining $22 million in projected benefits were from 99 jobs at the New Quarry, mainly truck drivers transporting aggregate to construction sites. Here too there was a problem. The company proposed Temecula Quarry would be in Riverside County right next to the border with San Diego County. The company predicted that 60% of the aggregate produced at the Temecula Quarry would be transported to San Diego County, reducing the need to transport aggregate to San Diego from more distant Riverside County Quarry's. The corporate consultants argued that the total production of aggregate would not change. One consultant put it this way. All that a new quarry can do is substitute for the supply of an existing quarry. New quarries cannot and do not cause additional aggregate to be mined, shipped, or used. Here the consultants were correct. The total production of aggregate is determined by demand. How many homes, businesses, and roads are being built? All a new quarry would do is change where the aggregate is produced. The five million tons produced in Temecula would mean five million fewer tons produced at quarries in other parts of Riverside County. The company's own argument implies that there would be no increase in production or jobs, just a shifting of production and jobs from existing quarries to the new quarry. So the claimed 172 million dollars in benefits for local residents turns out to be nothing at all, just 150 million dollars in profits for the construction company, and 99 jobs shifted from existing quarries to the new quarry. It is not the costs that are zero, it is the benefits. What about the economist's claims that there are no costs? Were Temecula residents unnecessarily concerned about property values? Another consultant argued that in the city of Corona, 40 miles away, there had been a direct positive correlation between mine production and property values. The city leaders evidently should be celebrating that their fair city was chosen for this mega-mind, which would have a mega effect on property values. This argument is outrageous. When any two things increase over time, there can be a statistical correlation without any causal relationship. I could show you a figure showing beer sales and the number of married people in the United States with a correlation of a remarkable 0.99. From this strong correlation, can we then conclude that drinking leads to marriage, or perhaps the other way around, that marriage leads to drinking? While there are surely a few married folks who would agree with that conclusion, the actual explanation is that as the population has grown over time, so is beer consumption. And so of marriages, babies, automobiles, shoes, college attendance, heart attacks, and many other things. Does wearing shoes increase the number of babies? Describing cars cause heart disease? There isn't necessarily any relationship between things that increase with the population, other than that they increase with the population. It's the same with mine production and property values. Both have increased over time, and there isn't necessarily a causal relationship between them. The consultants were paid to prove something, and when they found superficial evidence, they latched on and wouldn't let go. We all do this. It is so common that it even has a name, confirmation bias. We think we can predict the result of a football game, an election, or a stock pick, and we overestimate our forecasting ability. If our prediction turns out to be correct, this confirms how smart we are. If our prediction does not come true, it was just bad luck. Poor officiating, low voter turnout, the irrationality of other investors. Of course, consultants are often paid to find evidence of things they may not believe, and does anyone really think that living near a quarry increases the value of your home? It doesn't even pass the straight face test. Try making this claim to a friend without laughing at its absurdity. Nonetheless, for the right price, some people are willing to look for evidence that confirms the absurd, and then pass it off without flinching. They often find confirming evidence in coincidental correlations, and coincidental correlations are the norm with data that grow over time along with the population. This is exactly what the mining company tried to do, and they even backed it up with misdirecting statistics from surrounding towns. Another consultant, they hired lots of consultants, argued that home prices in Corona, California, which is ad quarries for decades, were increasing at approximately the same rate as home prices in Temecula, which so far has no quarries. Therefore quarries did not depress property values. Think about the logic behind this assumption. If the price of stake and the price of potatoes increase at the same rate, does that mean that a stake costs the same as a potato? Suppose that two identical homes are five miles apart in otherwise equally attractive locations. Their market values are the same and have been increasing steadily by 3% a year, in 1980, a mine opens next to one home, and its value immediately drops 20%. After that, both home values continue increasing by 3% a year, maintaining a constant 20% wedge between their market values. Just as the mining company consultant argued, the value of the home near the mine is increasing at the same rate as the value of the home five miles away. Does this parallel movement tell us whether the mine had a positive effect, a negative effect, or no effect on the value of the home near the quarry? No. The only way to answer this question is to see which home has the higher price. As any good magician knows, the key to fooling an audience is distraction. By talking about changes in home prices, the consultant is trying to distract our attention from the real issue. Our home price is lower near quarries. The answer is a resounding yes. We will seldom find identical homes, one next to a quarry, and one far away, but we can use a statistical model that takes into account home characteristics such as square footage, the number of bathrooms, proximity to amenities such as good schools, and proximity to dis-amendities such as mines. Using data for many homes, some 1800 square feet, some 2400, some with two bathrooms, some with three, some near a mine, some far away, we can estimate what an extra 100 square feet is worth, what an additional bathroom is worth, what proximity to a mine is worth. A 2006 study of thousands of homes in Ohio did exactly that. Here are the conclusions. The values are reduced by 15% for homes one mile from a quarry, 9% for homes two miles away, surprise, surprise, you can't increase the value of your home by persuading a mining company to put a quarry in your backyard. The Temecula Valley Convention and Visitors Bureau and the Chamber of Commerce to pro-business organizations in a strongly pro-business community listen to the mining company's arguments and were un-pursuaded. Both groups vehemently oppose the quarry. The corporation spent seven years and millions of dollars trying to get their quarry approved, but after reading thousands of pages of analysis and listening to dozens of hours of testimony from concerned citizens and dueling experts, the Riverside County Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors both rejected the quarry proposal. They evidently don't believe in Santa. Don't be fooled. Comparisons are the lifeblood of empirical studies. We can't determine if a medicine treatment policy or strategy is effective unless we compare it to some alternative. But watch out for superficial comparisons. Comparisons of percentage changes in big numbers and small numbers, comparisons of things that have nothing in common except that they increase over time. Comparisons of irrelevant data. All of these are like comparing apples to prunes.

---

## Standard Deviations_ Flawed Assumptions, Tortured Data, and Other Ways to Lie wi - 0005 - Chapter 5

Chapter 4. Oops. A computer makes calculations quickly and correctly, but doesn't ask if the calculations are meaningful or sensible. A computer just does what it's told. Sometimes the answer is wrong because the question is wrong. If I want to know the square root of 169 and I tell the computer to calculate the square root of 196, the computer will report that the answer is 14. This is the correct answer to the question I asked, but it is not the correct answer to the question that I meant to ask. These kinds of mistakes are called computational errors, but they are really human errors. Unfortunately some computational errors have had extremely serious consequences. In 1998 NASA launched a spacecraft named the Mars Climate Orbiter. The plan was that once the orbiter neared Mars, it would be sent into orbit more than 100 miles from Mars where it could safely record weather data. This $300 million space mission failed because the ground-based software measured thrust force in pounds per second and the engine hears, forgot to convert the numbers into Newton's, the metric measurement used by the orbiter. As the orbiter neared Mars, the engines were fired to push the spacecraft into orbit around Mars, but because of this miscalculation, the orbiter was propelled to within 37 miles of Mars and burned up in the atmosphere. $300 million fried all because of a typo. In 2012 there was a very different and even more expensive mistake. The UK branch of JP Morgan lost between $5 and $10 billion in the London Whale debacle, so named for the trader who placed the massive bets. It turned out that the bank's risk had been grossly underestimated because of a silly mistake. Part of the risk measurement involved the calculation of a simple average, for example, the average of 6 and 10 is 6 plus 10 divided by 2 equals 8. The programmer forgot to divide by the number of observations, so the average was incorrectly reported to be 6 plus 10 equals 16. The consequence was that the calculated measure of risk was much smaller than the actual risk. JP Morgan thought the Whale trades were relatively safe when they were in fact quite dangerous and ultimately disastrous. Sometimes computers are given incorrect data instead of incorrect instructions. The Joint Economic Committee of Congress once reported that the richest of one half of 1% of US families owned 35% of the nation's wealth. This was a staggering increase from the 25% figure calculated 20 years earlier. Politicians made speeches, surprise, surprise. newspapers reported the story with sensational headlines. The chairman of the Joint Economic Committee, Wisconsin Democrat David Obey, said that it is proof that the rich get richer and noted that the previous record was 32% in 1929. Obey concluded that this study makes mincemeat of the notion that this country needs more incentives for rich folks. A prominent economist John Kenneth Galbraith ominously warned that an intense concentration of wealth in the 1920s had been one of the causes of the Great Depression. Ordinary people could not afford to buy things and companies could not afford to hire people or produce things that people were not buying. David M. Gordon, professor of economics at the new school for social research in New York, warned that democracy in the United States is now in greater jeopardy than at any time in the past 50 years and probably since the republic's founding. Some skeptics in Washington rechecked the calculations and discovered that the reported increase was due almost entirely to the incorrect recording of one family's $2 million wealth as $200 million, an error that raised the average wealth of the handful of rich people who had been surveyed by nearly 50%. The corrected numbers showed that the richest one half of 1% owned 26.9%, not 35% of the nation's wealth. After the mistake was discovered, OB issued a statement that sounded oddly insincere. We are gratified to learn that the increased concentration of wealth in the hands of the super rich is not as great as it originally appeared. Other economists hedged their earlier statements but refused to back down from their conclusions. This error was corrected before it had any effect on economic policies. Another mix up though was not corrected soon enough. The government debt tipping point A 2010 paper by two Harvard professors, Carmen Reinhart and Ken Roguff concluded that a nation's economic growth is imperiled when the ratio of federal government's debt to the nation's annual output GDP exceeds 90%. In this case, it would take 90% of the nation's output to repay all the money the government had borrowed. This sounds serious but it isn't. There's no compelling reason for a government to pay off its debt any time soon. When we buy a home, the mortgage is much larger than our annual income. So what? The relevant question is whether our income is large enough to make our monthly mortgage payments not whether it is large enough to pay off the loan immediately. It's the same with the government and their burden is even easier because they can print money if needed. Furthermore, what's special about 90%? Why not 80% or 100%? There is no plausible reason why 90% is a magic number, the difference between economic growth and recession. Nonetheless, the professors argue that a debt-slash GDP ratio above 90% is a tipping point beyond which nations slip into recession and people took it seriously because after all these are Harvard professors. Their most compelling evidence is when Reinhard and Rogoff looked at 20 advanced countries, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States. For each year they calculated the nation's debt-slash GDP ratio, expressed as a percentage, and its rate of growth of inflation-adjusted GDP. These data were divided into four categories based on the debt-slash GDP ratio. Their study indicates that an increase in the ratio of debt to GDP reduces an economy's growth rate. Past 90% economies are thrown into recession with GDP falling and economies contracting. Reinhard and Rogoff conclude that at the very minimum this would suggest that traditional debt management issues should be at the forefront of public policy concerns. Their conclusion received worldwide attention as per swase of evidence for austerity. Fiscal hawks and many countries used the Rogoff Reinhard study as proof that governments should reduce spending and increase taxes in order to balance their budget, or even better, run a surplus so that government debt can be repaid. In the United States, the Republican Party's 2013 budget proposal stated, a well-known study completed by economists Ken Rogoff and Carmen Reinhardt confirms this common sense conclusion. The study found conclusive empirical evidence that gross debt, meaning all debt that a government owes, including debt held in government trust funds, exceeding 90% of the economy, has a significant negative effect on economic growth. Who can argue with common sense and conclusive empirical evidence? Buying into the hype, a 2013 Washington Post editorial ominously warned that debt to GDP could keep rising and stick dangerously near the 90% mark that economists regard as a threat to sustainable economic growth. Notice how the Washington Post morphed a study by two economists into a general opinion by all economists. The reality is that many economists don't think there is a 90% tipping point and they never did. One thing that most economists do agree on is that cutting spending and raising taxes in order to reduce government debt would have been exactly the wrong policies when the economy was still fragile from the Great Recession that started in December 2007. Many were deeply skeptical of the Rogoff Reinhardt study that was hard to pin down any serious errors. One concern was that the United States had only four years with a debt to GDP ratio above 90%. The economy had contracted during these four years, but they were very special years. 1946 to 1949, right after the end of World War II. Government debt was abnormally high because the government had borrowed heavily to finance the war. The post-war recession was caused by a drop in government military spending not by the debt accumulated during the war. Surely it was a mistake to think that these four years were evidence that government debt causes recessions. If anything, these four years were evidence that cutting government spending drastically, as advocated by the Fiscal Hawks, actually causes recessions. Nonetheless, the Reinhardt Rogoff study was used by Fiscal Hawks throughout the world to bolster support for what British Conservative Party leader David Cameron called the Age of austerity. Several European governments tried to reduce their budget deficits by cutting spending and raising taxes. The average unemployment rate in Europe rose from 10% in 2011 to 11% in 2012 and 12% in 2013. The International Monetary Fund, IMF, a frequent advocate of austerity, admitted that European austerity measures have been much more harmful than they expected. There is no way of knowing how much output was lost and how many people lost their jobs because of the Reinhardt Rogoff paper. Most sometimes play a game where they name a famous paper they wish they had written. The Reinhardt Rogoff paper is high on the list of papers that I am glad I didn't write. It turns out that the Reinhardt Rogoff study was deeply flawed from the start. Thomas Herndon, a graduate student at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, took a graduate statistics course in 2012, taught by Michael Ash and Robert Pollan, and one of his course assignments was to replicate a famous research paper. He didn't chose Reinhardt Rogoff. He tried mightily, but he could not replicate their results. He assumed he was doing something wrong, but he couldn't figure out what. Herndon's professors had seen similar situations before, and it is typically the students fault. This is one of the goals of this exercise to teach students to do serious work carefully and correctly. This time it was different. The famous paper had errors that even the professors couldn't identify. Herndon gave up trying to make sense of the study, and contacted Reinhardt and Rogoff, even though he thought it unlikely that famous professors would spend time helping a mere graduate student. When they ignored his initial request, he persisted, and persisted. After all, he needed to figure out what he was doing wrong so that he could pass his class. Reinhardt and Rogoff eventually gave herndon their data and spreadsheet calculations. He soon discovered the problem, which was actually a series of problems involving inadvertent errors and questionable procedures. A spreadsheet error The raw data for these 20 countries had been entered in reverse alphabetical order, online's 30 to 49 of a spreadsheet. However, when Reinhardt and Rogoff wrote the spreadsheet code for their calculations, they used lines 30 and 44 instead of lines 30 to 49, thereby emitting five countries, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, and Denmark. Three of these countries, Australia, Belgium, and Canada, had periods with debt to GDP ratios above 90 percent. All three had positive growth rates during those years. All three of these counter examples to the paper's conclusion were emitted from the Reinhardt Rogoff calculations. Selective emission of some data The Reinhardt Rogoff spreadsheet calculations emit other data as well. In many cases, this is because there are no data for some countries in some years. However, data for Australia, from 1946 to 1950, Canada, between 1946 and 1950, a New Zealand, from 1946 to 1949, are available, but were inexplicably not included in the calculations. The New Zealand emission is particularly important because the four emitted years, or four of the five years, 1951 as the fifth year, were debt to GDP exceeded 90 percent. New Zealand's GDP growth rates in these five years were respectively 7.7, 11.9, negative 9.9, 10.8, and negative 7.6 percent. The average growth rate was 2.6 percent. Reinhardt and Rogoff excluded the first four years and reported that New Zealand's average growth rate during its high debt years was negative 7.6 percent. Unusual averaging Reinhardt and Rogoff wrote that the calculations are based on 1,186 annual observations, and there are significant numbers in each category, including 96 above 90 percent. One might think that the negative 0.1 percent average growth rate for the 90 percent category is a straightforward average of 96 annual observations, but one would be wrong. Reinhardt and Rogoff calculated the average growth rate for each country, and then calculated the average of these country growth rates. For example, the United Kingdom had 19 years with a debt to GDP ratio above 90 percent, and its average GDP growth rate in these 19 years was 2.4 percent. Because of the four emitted years, New Zealand was counted as having had one year with a debt to GDP ratio above 90 percent, its GDP growth rate in this year was negative 7.6 percent. The average growth rate for these two countries using 20 annual observations is 1.9 percent. Reinhardt and Rogoff instead averaged 2.6 and negative 7.6 giving an average growth rate of negative 2.5 percent. We do not know if this was an inadvertent mistake, or if Reinhardt and Rogoff intended to make this unusual calculation, giving the same weight to one year of data in one country, and 19 years of data in another country. We do know, however, that their error bolstered their argument. Let's consider the effects of these glitches. 10 countries had episodes with debt to GDP ratios above 90 percent. In nine cases, the average growth rate was positive. The only exception was the post-war US, which is irrelevant. The actual number of high debt years and the number of years Reinhardt and Rogoff include in their calculations, emitted the first three countries and four years of New Zealand data. All of these emissions had positive average growth rates. Overall, admitting some data and waiting all countries equally, Reinhardt and Rogoff calculate the average GDP growth rate in high debt years to be negative 0.1 percent, including the missing data and taking into account the number of high debt years, the correct average is 2.2 percent. Hurnden-Ash and Pauline concluded that, contrary to Reinhardt and Rogoff, average GDP growth at public debt to GDP ratios over 90 percent is not dramatically different than when public debt to GDP ratios are lower. The Reinhardt Rogoff calculations tell a clean compelling story of higher debt inexorably leading to slower growth with a 90 percent tipping point throwing a nation into recession. In addition to the various errors in their calculations, these summary statistics hide how much variation there is in the data. There is not a simple, close relationship between debt and growth. Many high debt years were high growth years, many low debt years were low growth years. The data themselves proved that nothing is special about 90 percent. Correlation equals causation. The fiscal austerity enthusiasts interpret the Reinhardt Rogoff study as evidence that increased government debt reduces economic growth and as a stern warning that increasing the level of government debt past 90 percent of GDP is likely to cause an economic recession. Perhaps the causation goes the other way and that economic recessions cause the debt ratio to increase. First, there is a simple arithmetic argument, a drop in GDP directly increases the ratio of debt to GDP. Suppose that debt is 85 and GDP is 100, giving a debt to GDP ratio of 85 percent. If GDP falls to 90, the debt to GDP ratio increases to 94 percent. It is not the debt to GDP ratio that caused GDP to decline. It is declining GDP that caused the debt to GDP ratio to increase. But wait, there's more. During economic recessions, government tax revenue falls and government spending on unemployment insurance, food stamps, and other safety nets increases. Both of these forces increase government borrowing. An economic recession thus not only causes the denominator of the debt to GDP ratio to fall, it causes the numerator to increase. If there is a statistical correlation between economic growth and the debt to GDP ratio, it may be mostly or even entirely due to the effects of the economy on the debt ratio rather than the other way around. It is not that a high debt ratio slows growth, it is that slow growth raises the debt ratio. Another University of Massachusetts Amherst Professor, a Rindra Jit Dubh, looked at this very question. Using the Reinhardt Rhoagoff data, Dubh found that the debt to GDP ratio is more closely correlated with economic growth in the past than with economic growth in the future, which is exactly what we expect if it is economic growth that causes changes in the debt to GDP ratio. Does abortion reduce crime? 30 years ago, mathematical theorists were the gods of economics. Knowing nothing about the real world was almost a badge of honor. When Gerard Dubh-Roe was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1983, reporters tried to get him to say something about Ronald Reagan's economic policies. Dubh-Roe firmly refused to say anything, and some suspected that he didn't know or care. The Times have changed. Economic theorists are under attack for their unrealistic assumptions and demonstrably incorrect conclusions. The new economic gods are the empiricists who work with data. A sign of the Times is the best-selling book, Freakonomics, a rogue economist explores the hidden side of everything, co-authored by Chicago economist Stephen Levit and New York Times journalist Stephen Dubner. The title is utterly misleading, chosen exclusively to sell books. There's nothing freakish in the book. Levit is not a rogue economist, and the book does not explore the hidden side of everything. Far from being a rogue economist, Levit is the quintessential establishment economist. Levit has a bachelor's degree from Harvard and a PhD from MIT. He's currently a professor at the University of Chicago. In 2003, the American Economics Association awarded Levit the John Bates Clark Medal, which is given to the best American economist under the age of 40 and is often a precursor to a Nobel Prize. He is one of the empirical gods of economics. Levit is justifiably famous for his careful and ingenious use of data to tackle interesting questions, for example, the effects of campaign spending on election outcomes, the effects of imprisonment on the crime rate, and the effects of education incentives on teacher cheating. His conclusions are often provocative. Campaign spending doesn't matter much. Each prisoner released because of an overcrowding lawsuit leads to 15 more crimes per year. Rewarding teachers for student test scores greatly increases teacher-aided cheating. He once wrote that there is nothing we love more than finding things in data that no one else can see. But even gods make mistakes. Perhaps Levit's most famous paper, co-authored with John Donahue, argues that legalized abortion in the United States reduced the overall crime rate. The argument is that the unwanted children who were not born because of legalized abortion would have been prone to commit crimes, particularly violent crimes, because of their socio-economic environment and or parental neglect, after all, they were unwanted. It's an interesting theory and it might even be true. The problem is that there are so many genetic and environmental factors involved that it's hard to sort out the importance of each. Levit says that he likes to tease results out of the data. It sounds like he's boasting about a valuable recipe, but it also sounds like he is fond of ransacking data, which can be treacherous. Here are the data Levit relied on. Abortion was legalized in five US states in 1970, and nationwide on January 22nd, 1973, by Roe v. Wade. The US murder rate peaked in 1991, 18 years after Roe v. Wade, and then declined, suggesting that the criminal population had indeed been reduced by abortion. After looking at a variety of data for individual states, Donahue and Levit concluded that legalized abortion appears to account for as much as 50% of the recent drop in crime. This provocative argument was attacked from a variety of angles. Some argue that the murder rate rose in the 1980s and declined in the 1990s because of the ebb and flow of turf wars between rival cocaine gangs. Another theory is that crime rates dropped in the 1990s because of reduced childhood poisoning from exposure to leadet gasoline and lead-based paint. Furthermore, some researchers argue that abortion may be more common for women who think clearly about the future consequences of their actions, women who would have been good moms raising law-abiding children. Also, the availability of legalized abortion may have increased sexual activity and out-of-wet lock births, and children growing up in single-parent homes may be more prone to criminal activity. Both these arguments suggest that legalized abortion may actually increase crime rates. Let's look at some data dealing with the murder rate for 14 to 17-year-olds. The first legalized abortions under Roe v. Wade affected births that would otherwise have occurred in late 1973. These unwanted children would have turned 14 years old in late 1987 and would have turned 18 in late 1991. Thus, the first cohort affected by Roe v. Wade were in the 14 to 17-year-old age bracket between late 1987 and late 1991. This shows that the murder rate continued to increase during these years and didn't peak until 1993. The murder rate was three times higher in 1993 than in 1984, even though abortion was legal and readily available when the 1993 cohort was born and illegal and difficult when the 1984 cohort was born. How about the murder rates for the subsets 18 to 24 and 25 to 34-year-olds? The murder rate declined for the first 18 to 24-year-old cohort affected by Roe v. Wade, but increased for the first 25 to 34-year-old cohort affected by Roe v. Wade. So murder rates went down for 18 to 24-year-olds after Roe v. Wade, but went up for 14 to 17 and 25 to 34-year-olds. These data are not consistent with the theory that Roe v. Wade reduced the murder rate. The real consistency is that the murder rate peaked in the early 1990s for all three age groups. 1993 for ages 14 to 17 and 18 to 24, 1991 for ages 25 to 34. The murder rate for the 35-plus age group peaked in 1990. Put another way, the murder rate peaked in 1990 for the 35-plus age group and in 1991 for the 25 to 34-year-old age group, all of whom were born before Roe v. Wade. The murder rate peaked in 1993 for the 18 to 24-year-old group, some of whom were born before and some after Roe v. Wade. Finally, the murder rate peaked in 1993 for the 14 to 17-year-old group, all of whom were born several years after Roe v. Wade. The real story is that the murder rate peaked for all age groups in the early 1990s. Whatever the explanation, legalized abortion was not the cause. My bad. So how did Donahue and Levitt conclude that legalized abortion reduced crime? Two economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Christopher Foot and Christopher Gets carefully re-examined the Donahue Levitt study and found three problems. The first was that Donahue and Levitt used arrest data even though arrests may occur a year or more after the crime is committed. The second problem was that Donahue and Levitt looked at the total number of crimes rather than the crime rate, number of crimes adjusted for the size of the population. It is not surprising that a smaller population commits fewer crimes and by its very definition, legalized abortion reduced the population. The third problem was a programming error or in reality just a simple human error. Donahue and Levitt said that they used a statistical procedure that controlled for changes from year to year within individual states, but they didn't. After correcting for these glitches, Foot and Gets concluded that abortion most likely increased violent crime rates and had no effect on property crime rates. Levitt admitted the programming error and remarked, this is personally quite embarrassing because I pride myself on being careful with data. However, this is not the first such embarrassment for Levitt. An earlier paper on the effect of more police on crime also turned out to have a programming error which led to this apology. It is with tremendous personal embarrassment that I acknowledge these mistakes. In both cases, Levitt graciously admitted the mistakes, did he have a choice, but he continued to argue that other evidence supported his conclusions, though the effects might be smaller than he had originally thought. He may well be right, but it is very hard to live down an oops moment. Don't be fooled. Provocative assertions are provocative precisely because they are counterintuitive, which is a very good reason for skepticism. When you hear such an assertion, don't be easily persuaded that you are wrong. It may well be that the provocative assertion should be dismissed. Think about whether there is some problem with the data, perhaps self-selection bias. Think about whether the causation runs in a different direction. I know, yes, consider the possibility that there was a mistake that the computer was told to calculate the square root of 196 instead of the square root of 169. Even the best and most honest researchers are human, and humans make mistakes. The ironic lesson to be learned from the worldwide influence of the Reinhardt Rogov study and the runaway success of Freakonomics is that it is not true that data are more important than ideas. We are often duped by data.

---

## Standard Deviations_ Flawed Assumptions, Tortured Data, and Other Ways to Lie wi - 0006 - Chapter 6

Chapter 5. Graphical gaps Graphs can help us interpret data and draw inferences. They can help us see tendencies, patterns, trends and relationships. A picture can be worth not only a thousand words, but a thousand numbers. However, a graph is essentially descriptive, a picture meant to tell a story. As with any story, bumblers may mangled the punchline and the dishonest may lie. Data can be distorted and mangled by graphs, either intentionally or unintentionally. OMG During a routine meeting, an internet company's analytics group showed the chief executive officer, CEO, the revenue graph. The data in this figure are the company's revenue over the previous seven quarters, and frankly, it's a pretty boring figure. The CEO looked at the figure for a few moments and then she stunned the analytics group by blurting out. So why does this chart show revenue is pretty flat, and the chart I showed to the board last week showed revenue tanking? The analytics group hadn't seen the other chart, so they shrugged their shoulders. They honestly didn't know. The CEO summoned the finance guy who prepared the chart she showed the board and told him to pass around his chart. As soon as the analytics people saw the chart, they started laughing because the chart doesn't have a zero on the vertical axis. The CEO was not amused. She said that the board kept grilling her, asking her to explain why revenue was down so much. She kept protesting, it's not, and the board members kept pointing at that darn chart which showed revenue collapsing. The emission of zero magnifies the ups and downs in the data, allowing us to detect things that might otherwise be ambiguous. However, once zero has been emitted, the graph is no longer an accurate guide to the magnitude of the changes. Instead, we need to look at the actual numbers. President Ronald Reagan used a graph that's even less transparent because there are no numbers on the vertical axis. He used this graph on television to compare the taxes a family with a $20,000 income would pay with his tax proposal and with a plan drafted by the House Ways and Means Committee. Zero is no doubt emitted from the vertical axis, but the vertical axis doesn't show any numbers just a very large dollar sign. Because there are no numbers on the axis, we have no basis for gauging the magnitude of the gap between the lines. It turns out that the 1986 gap is a 9% tax reduction from $2,385 to $2,168. The emission of zero from the vertical axis magnifies this 9% difference into 90% of the height of the line labeled their bill, and the emission of numbers from the vertical axis prevents readers from detecting this misleading magnification. Afterward, David Gergen, a White House spokesman, told reporters, we tried it with numbers and found it was very hard to read on television, so we took them off. We were just trying to get a point across. Yeah, right. A phony crisis. In 1976, the National Science Foundation NSF constructed a figure which apparently shows a shocking decline in the number of Nobel Prizes in science, chemistry, physics, and medicine awarded to US citizens. What happened to our educational system? Is the pipeline drying up? Wait a minute. Let's consider the time axis. Each of the first seven time periods is for decades, but the eighth is for only a four-year period, 1971 to 1974. Because fewer Prizes are awarded during a four-year period than during a 10-year period, the NSF created the illusion of an alarming drop in the number of science prizes awarded to Americans. Using data for the full decade shows us that US citizens ended up winning even more prizes in the 1970s than in the 1960s. Of course, this trend can't continue forever unless there's an increase in the total number of prizes awarded, but in the 1970s, the US won more than half of the science Nobel Prizes. It was more of the same in the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. Let them eat cake. In an updated version of a New York Times graphic that accompanied an article by Neo-Conservative David Frum titled, Welcome Nouveau-Riche, there is a figure that shows a dramatic acceleration between 1980 and 1990 in the number of households earning more than $100,000 a year. Frum wrote that, nothing like this immense crowd of wealthy people has been seen in the history of the planet. Does that seem like a bit of hyperbole? There's something rather odd about the figure I'm describing. There's a five-year difference between each of the first four bars, but a ten-year difference between the fourth and fifth bars, which occur between 1980 and 1990. If the bars had been spaced properly and a 1985 bar inserted, the increase over time would appear gradual without an abrupt jump between 1980 and 1990. In addition, $100,000 in 1990 is not the same as $100,000 in 1965. This was about four times higher, so that $100,000 in 1990 was roughly equivalent to $25,000 in 1965. Adjusting for inflation, we should compare the number of 1965 families earning $25,000 with the number of 1990 families earning $100,000. We should also take into account the increase in the population between 1965 and 1990. It is not surprising that more people have high incomes when there are more people total. These problems are fixed by showing the percentage of households that earned more than $100,000 in inflation-adjusted dollars with 1985 inserted. Data for 1995 and 2000 could be included to give more historical context. Due to the appropriately adjusted data, the 1980s are unremarkable, what does stand out as the end of the 1990s during the internet bubble? Elastic Axis Let's update a graph that appeared in the Washington Post. The figuring question indicates that there has been a steady increase in the cost of medical care in the United States from 1940 through 2010. The costs are scaled to equal 1 in 1940. This straight line graph is embellished by hearts, perhaps to show that doctors really do care, or to suggest cupid straight arrow shot through 11 hearts. Or perhaps this unnecessary decoration is intended to distract attention from the horizontal axis. The 10 equally spaced intervals initially represent a difference of 35 years between 1940 and 1975, then a difference of 7 years between 1975 and 1982, and then either 3 or 4 years for the rest of the axis. These puzzling intervals were apparently chosen so that the line would be approximately straight. A straight line may be visually appealing, but misrepresent the data. For a graph to display the data accurately, the units on each axis must be consistent. A half inch shouldn't sometimes represent 35 years, sometimes 7 years, and sometimes 3 years. If the intervals change and mid graph, the figure will surely distort the data. A figure using consistent intervals would show that medical costs did not increase along a straight line. Why did costs accelerate after 1970? Perhaps it was the ramping up of Medicare which began in 1965. Perhaps it was because prices in general were increasing. These graphs should have adjusted medical costs for inflation, but we can't tell why from these data alone, but we do know is that changing intervals in mid graph distorted the data. Double the mischief. In 1786, William Playfair, a Scotsman of many talents not always employed honestly, despite his name, published The Commercial and Political Atlas, a collection of 44 charts that was a landmark in the graphical presentation of data. 43 of these charts showed how wages, prices, and other data had changed over time. This now commonplace tool was so different from anything seen previously that Playfair felt he had to defend it. This method has struck several persons as being fallacious because geometrical measurement has not any relation to money or to time, yet here it is made to represent both. Placer's most famous graph published in 1821 shows the weekly wages of a good mechanic and the price of wheat during the years 1565 to 1821. Playfair wrote that the main fact deserving of consideration is that never at any former period was wheat so cheap in proportion to mechanical labor as it is at the present time. Although Playfair drew the correct conclusion that wages had increased more than the price of wheat, his graph seems to show exactly the opposite. I will use US data for 1975 through 2010 on US median household income and the Consumer Price Index CPI to show why Playfair's graph was misleading. It is challenging to put these data on a single graph because income ranges between $12,000 and $50,000 while the CPI ranges between 54 and 218. One solution, Playfair's solution, is to use two vertical axes, one for income and the other for the CPI. Such a figure would seem to clearly demonstrate that household income has increased much more than the Consumer Price Index CPI. Americans today are apparently much better off economically. But what it really demonstrates is that if you double the axes, you can double the mischief. Having two vertical axes and a midding zero from either or both opens a statistical beauty parlor with many cosmetic possibilities. You could have a figure that shows the very same data, but now it seems the prices increased much more than the income and that would be because the gimmick is the choice of numbers to show on the axes. The ups and downs of the data can be exaggerated by putting a small range of numbers on the axis and can be dampened by putting a large range of numbers on the axis. If you use a narrow range for the income axis and a wide range for the CPI axis, you'll make the growth and income appear larger than increase in prices. You can do the opposite using a wide range for the income axis and a narrow range for the CPI axis to make the increase in prices appear larger than the increase in income. How can we fix it? There's no rule that fits all cases. For this particular case, a good solution is to use the price data to adjust the income data, thereby creating one set of numbers, income adjusted for inflation. Adjusted for inflation, the median household income has increased modestly over this 35-year period, income has increased a bit more than prices, but there have been setbacks along the way due to several economic recessions. Student Lies A student newspaper at a medium-sized college called Student Life, affectionately known as Student Lies on campus, created a figure which plainly shows that during the 1990s, the cost of attending this college, Tuition plus Room and Board, rose dramatically while the college's US News ranking fell sharply. So many inconsistencies. Where to begin? This figure has two vertical axes, one for cost and one for ranking, and zero has been emitted from both axes to exaggerate the changes in costs and ranking. Not only is zero emitted, but the entire axis and the associated numbers have been redacted, so we have no way of gauging whether the changes during the 1990s were large or small. The data behind this graph show that the cost increased from $20,000 in 1990 to $36,000 in 2000, about 6% a year, which is not trivial, but similar to the rate of increase at comparable colleges. The US News ranking went from 17th to 13th, which is a substantial change. But wait, in college rankings, number one is the best. Going from 17th to 13th is actually an improvement. Contrary to the shocking story I just told you, costs went up by 6% a year about the same as at comparable colleges, and the US News ranking improved dramatically. This figure is an updated and simplified adaptation of an even more bizarre graph published on the front page of the Ithaca Times about Cornell University's tuition and ranking. In addition to the distortions of the other figure, the Times figure didn't have a horizontal axis because it compared Cornell's tuition and ranking over two different time periods. The tuition over the 35-year period of 1965 to 1999, while the college ranking was over the 12-year period of 1988 to 1999. Yankee tickets are a bargain. The New York Yankees are baseball's most storied franchise, having played in 40 of the 108 World Series through 2013 and having won 27 times. The St. Louis Cardinals are a distant second with 11 championships. Forty-three Yankees are in the hall of fame, including Babe Ruth, Lou Gerrig, Joe DiMaggio and Mickey Mantle. The Yankees are also one of the most despised teams in professional sports, in part because of the perception that they buy success by taking players from teams in smaller cities that cannot match Yankee salaries. Some baseball fans wear Yankee baseball caps with pride, while others prominently sport Yankee's Suck T-shirts. Yankee Stadium opened in 1923 at a cost of more than $30 million in today's dollars, and with unprecedented seating for 58,000 people. Babe Ruth was the most popular baseball player in the 1920s, and he had a home run in the first game played at Yankee Stadium. It sold to watch Ruth hit home runs paid for the stadium, giving it the nickname, The House that Ruth built. 86 years later, in 2009, the Yankees moved across the street to a new Yankee Stadium, built at a cost of over $2 billion. While the new stadium was being built, many fans feared that the Yankees would pay for the stadium by escalating already expensive ticket prices. Several data on the price of a box seat at Yankee Stadium were used to create a figure which shows that, contrary to perception, ticket prices did not accelerate, but actually slowed down during the years 1995 to 2010. There's something very unusual about the figure I'm describing. inexplicably, time is on the vertical axis. We are so accustomed to seeing time on the horizontal axis that it is very difficult to make sense of such a figure at first glance. If you flip the two, putting time where it belongs on the horizontal axis, this reversal of the axis reverses the conclusion, and we now see that Yankee ticket prices did not slow down, but accelerated after 1994. The annual rate of increase was 6% between 1967 and 1994, and 21% between 1994 and 2010. Does that still seem like a bargain to you? The art of graphing. The first full-time graph specialist at Time Magazine was an art school graduate who asserted that the challenge is to present statistics as a visual idea rather than a tedious parade of numbers. Numbers are not inherently tedious, they can be illuminating, fascinating, even entertaining. The trouble starts when we decide that it is more important for a graph to be artistic than informative. Is bigger better? The U.S. rate of inflation was above 13% in 1979 when President Jimmy Carter appointed Paul Volcker, Chair of the Federal Reserve. The Fed increased interest rates to unprecedented levels in an all-out war on inflation. When Volcker was asked if these tight-money policies would cause an economic recession, he replied, yes, and the sooner the better. In another conversation he said that he wouldn't be satisfied until the last buzz saw is silenced. What Volcker meant was that he wanted to raise interest rates high enough to choke off borrowing and shut down the building industry. In 1981, interest rates reached 18% on home mortgages and were even higher for most other loans. As interest rates rose, households and businesses cut back on their borrowing and on their purchases of automobiles, homes, and office buildings. Construction workers who lost their jobs were soon spending less on food, clothing, and entertainment, sending ripples through the economy. Farmers with expensive loans and declining income drove tractors into downtown Washington, D.C. to blockade the Federal Reserve building. The unemployment rate rose from 5.8% in 1979 to above 10% in 1982, the highest level since the Great Depression, but the Fed's scorched-earth policy reduced the rate of inflation from above 13% in 1979 to below 4% in 1982. Let me now describe a figure that compares the purchasing power of a $100 bill at the end of three U.S. President's terms. By definition, a $100 bill was worth $100 at the end of Gerald Ford's term. By the end of Jimmy Carter's term in 1981, a $100 bill was only worth $67, and that it would only buy as much as $67 bought four years earlier. At the end of Ronald Reagan's term, a $100 bill was only worth $49. These shrinking $100 bills seemed to show a relatively modest decline in value during Jimmy Carter's term and a much larger decrease during Reagan's term, which is odd since Carter was president during the Great inflation in the late 1970s and Reagan became president in January 1981 just as inflation was receding. The numbers, from $100 to $67 to $49, certainly indicate that the value of the dollar fell more during Carter's term than during Reagan's term, but the pictures tell a completely different story. One problem with this figure is that Carter was in office for four years and Reagan was in office for eight years. Although the years are identified in the figure, this difference in the length of their terms is not obvious because there are no years on the horizontal axis, indeed there is no axis at all. The invisible vertical axis is also a problem because we cannot tell if zero has been emitted. Even worse, instead of simple bars, the graph was in live and with $100 bills. At the end of Reagan's term, prices were twice what they were at the end of Ford's term, and the value of a $100 bill had fallen by half. If the height of the Reagan bill had been reduced by half without changing the width, the picture would have been distorted like a fun house mirror. To avoid this squished image, the width and the height of the Reagan $100 bill were both halved, which creates a different distortion. Now the area of the Reagan bill is one-fourth the area of the Ford bill, which makes it seem like the value of a $100 bill fell by three-fourths. This is one of those cases where a few numbers are more informative than a graph. Prices increased at an annual rate of 10.7% during Carter years and 3.7% during the Reagan years, which is very different from the misinformation conveyed by the well-intentioned but too cute by half figure I just described. Optical Delusions Native American tribes operate several gambling casinos in southern California. A consultant was hired by one of the tribes to evaluate the location of these casinos based on driving distances for potential customers. This is a complicated question because it should take into account where households live and also their casino alternatives. The appeal of a casino 30 miles from potential customers is diluted if another casino is only 10 miles from these customers. This consultant developed a proprietary model for estimating location values. He didn't explain his model, but he showed the results in a figure which doesn't say much, but is a good example of chart junk. It captures lines, blots and splotches in live and graphics, but too often create unattractive chart junk that confuses the reader and strains the eyes. A graph should reveal patterns that would not be evident in a table. This figure that I'm talking about does not do this. The bars evidently show the location values for these 12 casinos, I say evidently because the vertical axis is unlabeled. We are not told what these numbers mean or how they were calculated. Are these dollars, percents, households? The 12 bars are arranged to resemble a bell curve, but there is no reason why the first bar is the Chumash Casino and the last bar is the Golden Acorn. The pattern in the bars, rising to a peak and then falling like a bell curve, reveals no useful information. It would be more sensible to arrange the bars from tallest to smallest. Moreover, there are no labels on the horizontal axis at all. Instead, we have to look back and forth from the graph to the legend and the similarity in the bar patterns makes it tedious and difficult to do so. The bar patterns themselves are distracting and the three-dimensional appearance is not helpful. Finally, even if we decipher the bars, it is not easy to line up the bar heights with the numerical values on the vertical axis. This bar chart is not an improvement over a simple table. Sometimes, less is more. Computers can also generate text junk, printed documents that look like ransom notes made by pasting together characters in mismatched sizes, styles, and fonts. Just because a word processing program has several style options doesn't mean we have to use them all. I once received a two-page newsletter that used 32 different fonts, not counting variations created by letters that were bold, italicized, or different sizes. It was painful to read. Chart junk, text junk, it's all junk, worthless clutter that distracts and confuses instead of clarifying and informing. Take out the trash. Don't be fooled. A graph can reveal patterns, for example, how income has changed over time and how income and spending are related to each other. Graphs can also distort and mislead. Watch out for graphs where zero has been emitted from an axis. This emission lets the graph zoom in on the data and show patterns that might otherwise be too compact to detect. However, this magnification exaggerates variations in the data and can be misleading. Most of all are graphs with no numbers on the axis, because then there is no way of telling how much the variations have been exaggerated. Watch out for data that have not been adjusted for the growth of the population and prices. Don't be deceived by graphs that put time on the vertical axis where we are not used to seeing it, and or by graphs that use inconsistent spacing, letting a half-inch sometime be a five-year interval and sometimes be a ten-year interval. Graphs should not be mere decoration to amuse the easily bored. A useful graph displays data accurately and coherently and helps us understand the data. Chart junk in contrast distracts, confuses, and annoys. Chart junk may be well-intentioned, but it is misguided. It may also be a deliberate attempt to mystify.

---

## Standard Deviations_ Flawed Assumptions, Tortured Data, and Other Ways to Lie wi - 0007 - Chapter 7

Chapter 6 Common nonsense The great French mathematician Pierre-Simon Leplasse observed that probabilities are nothing but common sense reduced to calculation. We should be cautious about calculating without thinking. Calculations are the easy part. The more important question is, whether they make sense. The Monte Hall problem The statistical puzzles and paradoxes can be entertaining and challenging mental workouts. They also illustrate the value of thinking before calculating. A wonderful example is the Monte Hall problem. On the television show, let's make a deal. You are offered a choice of what is behind one of three doors. One at grand prize, and the other two goats. After you pick a door, the host Monte Hall does what he always does by showing you a goat behind a door you did not choose, and asking if you want to switch doors. Most people think that because there are two doors left, your chances are now 50-50. But use your common sense. You already knew that one of the doors you didn't choose had a goat behind it. Does it matter if Monte Hall reminds you that there is a goat behind one of these doors, or if he proves it by showing you a goat? You haven't learned anything useful about the door you did choose. There is still a one-third chance that it is the winning door, and therefore the probability that the last door is the winner has risen to two-thirds. You should switch. Now allow me to describe a table that shows the consequences of three hundred plays of this game, each time with door number one being the initial choice. In the one hundred cases where the prize is behind door one, the host shows door two half the time and door three half the time. And door two or door three has the prize, the host must show the other door. Door two is shown one hundred and fifty times, door three is shown one hundred and fifty times. No matter whether door two or three is shown, the prize is behind door one one-third of the time. Another way to think about this puzzle is to suppose that you faint after you choose door one. You did not see Monte open a door, and you did not hear his offer to switch. When you're revived, Monte shows you what is behind the door you chose. Surely your chances of winning are still one-third. Skeptics are sometimes persuaded by the extreme case of one million doors. Suppose that you play this game over and over. Each time Monte shows you goats behind all but one of the remaining doors. Do you think that you will win the grand prize half the time? Marilyn Boss Savant listed in the Guinness Book of World Records Hall of Fame for Highest IQ, set off a nationwide fjure when she discussed the Monte Hall problem in her syndicated column, Ask Marilyn. She gave the correct answer and then received more than ten thousand letters, many from college professors, most saying that she was wrong. A math professor at George Mason University was incensed. You blew it. Let me explain. If one door is shown to be a loser, that information changes the probability of either remaining choice, neither of which has any reason to be more likely to one half. As a professional mathematician, I'm very concerned with the general public's lack of mathematical recipes. Please help by confessing your error and in the future, being more careful. Marilyn stuck to her answer and invited people to play the game at home. Tens of thousands of students tried it in classrooms all over the country. Computer simulations were run at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. Slowly, public opinion shifted. Marilyn was right. The George Mason professor said that he wrote her another letter, telling her that after removing my foot from my mouth, I'm now eating humble pie. I vowed his penance to answer all the people who wrote to castigate me. It's been an intense professional embarrassment. The New York Times published a story on this saga, including an interview with the real Monte Hall, who played a version of this game at the conclusion of thousands of episodes of the television show Let's Make a Deal. Hall knew that the contestants' initial choice still had a one-third chance of being correct, and he also knew that opening one door made contestants think that their chances had just increased to one half. He called this the Henry James treatment, or the turn of the screw. Once the contestants' mindset was 50-50, Hall could psychologically push them one way or another by offering them thousands of dollars to switch or not switch. Hall also noted that he didn't have to play by Marilyn's rules. If the contestants' initial choice was a door with a goat behind it, Hall could simply open the door without offering the contestant a chance to switch. Hall played the game with the Times writer ten times, and the writer ended up with a goat every time. The girl named Florida. Another paradox involves a man named Smith, who is walking with his daughter and says that he has another child at home. What is the probability that the absent child is a girl? At first blush it seems to be one-half, but some experts dismiss this answer as naive. These experts say the correct answer is one-third. They also say that the probability changes from one-third to one-half if we find out that the girl with Smith is his older child. But how can that be true? This paradox has appeared in many different forms, involving boys, girls, bears, and beagles, and in many different places, including a Martin Gardner 1959 column in Scientific American, John Palos' 1988 book Enumeracy, and Leonard Lodinot's 2008 book The Drunkards Walk. The traditional assumptions undergirding the problem are that one-fourth of all two child families have two boys, one-fourth have two girls, and one-half have one boy and one girl if the boy is born first, and one girl and one boy if the girl is born first. These assumptions are not exactly correct empirically, but this puzzle is about logic, not data. The so-called expert argument is that once we learn that one of Smith's children is female, there are only three possibilities left. Boy girl, girl boy, and girl girl. Therefore the probability of two girls is one-third, and the probability of one boy and one girl, boy girl or girl boy is two-thirds. Sounds reasonable, but before you agree, consider this. If this logic is correct, it would also apply if Smith happened to be walking with a boy. Then we could rule out girl girl and conclude that there is a two-thirds probability that Smith has one boy and one girl. If this argument is correct, it doesn't matter whether Mr. Smith is walking with a girl or a boy. Either way, there would be a two-thirds probability that he has one boy and one girl, therefore we don't need to know the gender of the child with Smith. The child could be of indeterminate gender, hiding behind Smith or playing in the park with dozens of other children. No matter what, there is a two-thirds probability that Smith has one boy and one girl. This is nonsense. Only half of all two child families have one boy and one girl. Common sense must be correct, and the expert reasoning must be flawed. Step back and consider how Smith happens to be walking with one of his children. Allow me to describe a table which shows 400 families evenly divided among boy boy, girl, girl boy and girl girl. In the 100 cases where Smith has two boys, he always walks with a boy. In the 100 cases where Smith has two girls, he always walks with a girl. In the cases where he has a daughter and son, boy girl or girl boy, a plausible assumption is that he is equally likely to walk with either child. More about this table. In the first row there are 200 cases where Smith is walking with a girl. The absent child is a girl in 100 cases, girl girl, and a boy in the other 100 cases, boy girl or girl boy. In the second row the 200 cases where Smith is walking with a boy, the absent child is a boy in 100 cases, boy boy and a girl in the other 100 cases, boy girl or girl boy. No matter whether Smith walks with a girl or boy, his other child is equally likely to be a boy or girl. The experts are wrong and common sense is correct. The experts continue their flawed logic by arguing that if we learn that the girl walking with Smith is older than her sibling, the probability that her sibling is female increases from one third to one half. The expert argument is that after we learn that the daughter accompanying Smith is the older child, we can rule out boy boy and boy girl, leaving only girl boy and girl girl. Therefore the probability of two daughters increases from one third to one half. But let's use our common sense to consider the logical implications. If learning that the daughter is older increases the probability of two daughters from one third to one half, then learning that the daughter is younger would also increase the probability of two daughters from one third to one half. But the girl must be either older or younger, and according to the expert argument, the probability increases from one third to one half either way. Therefore we know the probability is one half, even if we do not know whether the girl is older or younger. Common sense is right, and the experts are wrong once again. Load now recently enhanced the two child paradox by arguing that if the girl reveals that she has an unusual name like Florida, this too increases the probability of two girls from one third to one half. His argument is again counterintuitive and ultimately incorrect. If Load now's argument were correct, it would apply to every name since every name is unusual. If the first name is not sufficiently unusual, make it the first in middle names or the first name middle name in birth date. If the argument applies to every name, then it doesn't matter what the name is or whether we even know the name. There is no paradox just tortured logic. In 2010, at gathering for Gardener, a biennial conference honoring Martin Gardener, Gary Foshi presented yet another variation. He walked to the stage and said, I have two children. One is a boy born on a Tuesday. What is the probability I have two boys? After a few moments, Foshi continued, the first thing you think is, what does Tuesday got to do with it? Well, it has everything to do with it. And then, he stepped down from the stage. This ignited a storm of debate at the conference and on the internet. My answer is that, well, Tuesday does have nothing to do with it. If Tuesday changed the probability, then so would Wednesday, Thursday, or any other day of the week. But the child must be born on some day. Therefore, if Foshi's argument is correct, we can change the probability without knowing the day of the week. Foshi is wrong. The day of the week doesn't matter. What if? An impatient relative, let's call him Bob, went to a big box store to buy a smartphone. So many choices. He asked a store employee for help and was increasingly frustrated by the employee's incomprehensible answers. Bluetooth, geo-tagging, megapixels, HDML, iOS, LCD, RAM, ROM, blah, blah, blah. Finally, Bob alerted out, are you on drugs and stormed out of the store? During his drive home, Bob had a great idea. Bob did a little research and found that a simple urine test for marijuana usage is 95% accurate. That is certainly good enough. If 95% accurate is good enough for statistical tests, it is good enough for weeding out weed users. But if Bob's eye was not in the way, Bob had a good idea. Bob had a good idea. Bob did a little research and found that a simple urine test for marijuana usage is 95% accurate. That is certainly good enough. But if Bob's idea were put into practice, America's unemployment rates might go through the roof and not because we are a nation of stoners. Bob's mistake, which is very common, is that he confused two conditional probabilities. Several years ago, a black college professor asked a group of black military veterans how many African-American professional athletes there are in the United States. The guesses ranged from 50,000 to 500,000. The correct answer was 1200. There were 12 times that many black lawyers and 15 times that many black doctors in the United States. No one in the audience believed him, but he was right. The underlying problem is a confusion of conditional probabilities. We see that a large percentage of professional athletes are black and subconsciously think that a large percentage of blacks are professional athletes. The error is even more obvious if we change it from race to gender. One hundred percent of the players in the NBA are male, but only a minuscule fraction of all males play in the NBA. At the time, many, maybe most African-American children, wanted to be the next Michael Jordan or Magic Johnson. Today, they want to be LeBron James or Kevin Durant. The tragedy is that they almost surely won't. It's great to have dreams and ambitions, but it's also important to be realistic. Academics and athletics are both important, and the scholar athlete should be revered, but the scholar is more likely to end up with a good job than is the athlete. In 2012, the third string quarterback of Ohio State University tweeted, why should we even have to go to class if we came here to play football? If we didn't come to play school, classes are pointless. Well, a few years from now, we'll see how that worked out. The false positive problem. The same confusion arises in drug testing. Ninety-five percent accuracy for a marijuana test means that of those who use marijuana, ninety-five percent test positive. A very different question is, of those who test positive, what fraction are marijuana users? If an employee is given a drug test, two kinds of errors can happen. A false positive occurs if the test incorrectly indicates the presence of a drug, a false negative occurs if the test fails to detect the presence of drugs. To illustrate the potential seriousness of the false positive problem, consider a test administered to ten thousand employees of whom five hundred, five percent, use marijuana, and ninety-five hundred ninety-five percent do not. Suppose further that the test is ninety-five percent accurate, ninety-five percent of marijuana users test positive, and ninety-five percent of those who do not use marijuana test negative. Allow me to share a table with you where five hundred people who use marijuana have four hundred and seventy-five ninety-five percent who have a positive test result and twenty-five or five percent who don't. Of the ninety-five hundred who don't use marijuana, four hundred and seventy-five, five percent, have a positive result and nine thousand and twenty-five ninety-five percent do not. So far so good. However this same table also shows that of the nine hundred and fifty positive test results, four hundred and seventy-five are false positives and astounding fifty percent of those who test positive don't use marijuana. This is why we need to be careful with conditional probabilities. Although ninety-five percent of all marijuana users test positive, only fifty percent of those who test positive are marijuana users. In Chandler B. Miller, 1997, the US Supreme Court ruled eight to one that a Georgia law requiring candidates for certain state offices to pass a drug test violated the Fourth Amendment's protection against unreasonable searches. The court ruled that searches are permissible in some closely guarded cases where a specific individual is not suspected of a crime, but a special need overrides the right to privacy, for example, drug testing of airline pilots. However the court concluded that the possibility that a state's elected officials use drugs does not jeopardize public safety. That's an invitation to supply your own punchline. The Rare Disease Problem The false positive problem also arises in medical tests for a disease. As with the marijuana test, even though a test might be very accurate in detecting a disease, it may still be the case that many, even most people who test positive, do not actually have the disease. Here's a very specific example. One hundred doctors were asked this hypothetical question. In a routine examination you find a lump in a female patient's breast. In your experience only one out of one hundred such lumps turns out to be malignant, but to be safe you order a mammogram x-ray. If the lump is malignant there is a 0.80 probability that the mammogram will identify it as malignant. If the lump is benign there is a 0.90 probability that the mammogram will identify it as benign. In this particular case the mammogram identifies the lump as malignant. In light of these mammogram results what is your estimate of the probability that this lump is malignant? Of the 100 doctors surveyed 95 gave probabilities of around 0.75, however the correct probability is actually one tenth of that, 0.075. Now let's turn our attention to yet another table which shows the calculations for 1,000 patients. The lumps are malignant in 10 cases, 1% of 1000, and the test gives a correct positive result in 8 of the malignant cases, 80%. Of the 990 benign cases the test gives a correct negative result in 891 cases, 90%. In the first numerical row for those ten patients with malignant tumors the test gives a positive result 80% of the time, yet looking at the first numerical column of the 107 patients with positive test results, only 7.5% actually have malignant tumors, 8 divided by 107 equals 0.075. Even though 80% of the 10 malignant tumors are correctly identified as malignant, these positive test results are far outnumbered by the false positives, the 10% of the 990 benign lumps that are identified incorrectly. Sometimes as here a small percentage of a large number is bigger than a large percentage of a small number. It is very easy to misinterpret conditional probabilities and these doctors evidently did so. According to the researcher who conducted this survey, the airing physicians usually report that they assume that the probability of cancer, given that the patient has a positive x-ray, was approximately equal to the probability of a positive x-ray in a patient with cancer. The latter probability is the one measured in clinical research programs and is very familiar, but it is the former probability that is needed for clinical decision-making. It seems that many, if not most, physicians confuse the two. Most doctors evidently confuse the following conditional statements. If the lump is malignant, what is the probability that the test result will be positive? Answer 80%. If the test result is positive, what is the probability that the lump is malignant? Answer 7.5%. Our misinterpretation of medical data could have tragic consequences. The Dartmouth Salmon Study False positives are inevitable when there are a large number of tests, for example, suppose that a seemingly healthy woman has a physical checkup which involves several independent tests of risk factors such as cholesterol and blood pressure that might indicate a health problem. For each test, the result is flagged as abnormal if the reading is outside a range that encompasses 95% of the readings for healthy women. On any single test, there is a 5% chance of a false positive. For 10 tests, there is a 40% chance of a false positive. For 100 tests, the probability of a false positive result is above 99%. As the number of tests increases, the chances of a false positive approaches 100%. Here's an example with a standard neuroscience experiment that involves a very large number of tests. A volunteer is put in an MRI machine and shown various images and asked questions about the images. Instead of using electrodes implanted in the brain-to-track brain activity, functional magnetic resonance imaging, FMRI, is used to measure magnetic disruption, which happens as oxygenated and deoxygenated blood flows through the brain. After the test, the researchers look it up to 130,000 voxels, 3D data, to see which parts of the brain were stimulated by the images and questions. The FMRI measurements are very noisy, picking up all sorts of magnetic signals from the environment and from variations in the density of fatty tissue in different parts of the brain. Sometimes the voxels miss brain activity, a false negative, sometimes they suggest activity where there is none, a false positive. A student named Craig Bennett did an unusual variation on this experiment in a Dartmouth laboratory. Used an MRI machine to study the brain activity of a salmon as it was shown a series of 15 photographs. Here is part of this report. One mature Atlantic salmon, Salmosa-lar, participated in the FMRI study. The salmon was approximately 18 inches long, weighed 3.8 pounds, and was not alive at the time of scanning. Task The task administered to the salmon involved completing an open-ended, mentalizing task. The salmon was shown a series of photographs depicting human individuals in social situations with a specified emotional balance. The salmon was asked to determine what emotion the individual in the photo must have been experiencing. Design Stimuli were presented in a block design with each photo presented for 10 seconds, followed by 12 seconds of rest. A total of 15 photos were displayed. Total scan time was 5.5 minutes. Analysis Boxel-wise statistics on the salmon data were calculated through an ordinary least squares estimation of the general linear model GLM. Predictors of the hemodynamic response were modeled by a box-car function, convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response. A temporal high-pass filter of 128 seconds was included to account for low frequency drift. No autocorrelation correction was applied. The analysis section sounds pretty professional, right? But did you notice in the subject section that the salmon was not alive at the time of scanning? Yep. Craig put a dead salmon he purchased at a local market into the MRI machine, showed it photographs, and asked it questions. Nonetheless, with so many boxes, some false positive showed up, which might be interpreted as the salmon's reaction to the photos and questions, except that the salmon was dead. Bennett and his professor Abigail Baird used this experiment to argue forcefully that FMRI research needs to take into account the false positive problem, which up to 40% of published papers had not done. This dead salmon study got more pressed than most FMRI studies, even winning one of the IG Nobel Prizes awarded annually at a hilarious Harvard ceremony for achievements that first make people laugh and then make them think. Don't be fooled. The Monte Hall problem is a great paradox because our intuition is wrong and can be improved by using common sense. The two child paradox is also wonderful, but for a very different reason, here our intuition is correct and can be confirmed by using common sense. Don't just do the calculations. Use common sense to see whether you're answering the correct question. The assumptions are reasonable and the results are plausible. If a statistical argument doesn't make sense, think about it carefully. You may discover that the argument is nonsense. The false positive problem is related to a confusion of conditional probabilities. A test may be very likely to show a positive result in certain situations. For example, if a disease is present, yet a positive test result is not insured that the condition is present. It may be a false positive. This positive are more common when the condition is rare, like a malignant tumor, or when there are a large number of readings like the dead salmon MRI.

---

